<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻie₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flexible, inconstant, changeable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻie₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to play the game of loop and ball; the game itself: a flexible stick made of braided coconut leaflets with a loop at one end and a tapa ball on a string attached below the loop, the object being to catch the ball in the loop; this game was often played to a chant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>walrus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the lace fern (Sphenomeris chinensis syn. chusana), a common wild fern in Hawaiʻi; also known in other parts of Polynesia and in Asia. Long, slender stems support smooth, ovate, pointed fronds, about 30 cm long, which are subdivided three times. Formerly a brown dye was extracted from the fronds.  [(Neal 15): "The palaʻā is said to have been worn about the hips of Hiʻiaka, sister of Pele, the volcano goddess, and was the fern that she sent to trip and entangle the moʻo, or dragons, when she fought against them. In female ailments, the palaʻā was used to disperse disease, as Hiʻiaka used it to disperse her foes."]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tapa of māmaki bark dyed brownish-red with palaʻā fern, of silky quality.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brownish-red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of stone, used for sinkers for octopus fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palaʻīloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>discolored, as of pandanus fruit that darkens; to assume a softer, darker color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seaweeds or scum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parlor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• daub, 
   • smear, smudge, blot; 
   • dab of excreta 
   (cf. pala kūkae).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>underdone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coated, as the tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a form of gonorrhea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intoxicating drink made of watermelon juice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Marattia douglasii), with a short trunk and large, long-stemmed, much divided, dark-green fronds. In time of famine, the thick, starchy, hoof-shaped bases of the frond stems, which cover the short trunk, were eaten after being baked in an imu over night. The mucilaginous water resulting from slicing and soaking the raw stems in water was used medicinally. Pieces of the fronds mixed with maile leis enhanced their fragrance. The fern was used also in heiau ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pala₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire protection; fireproof.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale hauhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloth protecting (pale) lashing of ʻiako, outrigger boom, to the canoe float
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale hope₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>after part of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale hope₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bearers of the after part of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweatband, in a hat; protection from perspiration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale huila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fender, as of a car. lit., wheel guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale hāliʻi moena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coarse mat covering, as spread on the ground; insulting epithet for worthless, low person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale hānai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>child's bib.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breakwater; any wall or embankment that protects the land from the sea, levee; taffrail of a vessel; railing of a vessel. lit., sea guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>war defense, shield (Kin. 15.1) , defensive armor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kauoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break or ignore a law.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>car bumper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deliver a child; midwife.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale keʻehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stirrup shield.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>repeat mark in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armor. lit., steel shield.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horse or ox next to wagon tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kōhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boundary left by cutting; division between taro patches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale kōkō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in music, vertical row of dots which forms a repeat mark. lit., prolonging bar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale lauʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti-leaf covering; said also to be a prayer asking for release from a taboo that prevents one from leaving a taboo spot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shield, worn on the arm; armguard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>saddle blanket. lit., horse guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double bar in musical notation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale lua ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavy black bar in musical notation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale lā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>awning. lit., sun protection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale maka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>veil that conceals the face, especially as worn by Arab women. mask, blindfold, goggles (HE).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale makani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>windshield.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bed sheet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale mua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fore part of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale mua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bearers of the fore part of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seat cover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale nui ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavy black bar in musical notation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale poʻohiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shoulder pads or protection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale pukaaniani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>window curtain, drapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale pākaukau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>table cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale pākaukau ʻaila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oilcloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale pāpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hat lining.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale uhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>veil, covering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale uluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pillowcase. lit., pillow guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale umauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breastplate, as in armor. lit., chest shield.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale umauma unahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brigandine (Ier. 46.4) , coat of mail. lit., scales chest shield.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breakwater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brassiere. lit., breast guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>persons who protect (pale) a log canoe being carried from the forest to the sea. Those in front were pale mua, those aft were pale hope.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foot covering or protection; house slipper or sandals (also kāmaʻa pale wāwae); leather part of stirrups covering the rider's feet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale ʻumeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dish towel. lit., bowl protection, so called because dish towels were tied about poi bowls to prevent dust or insects from falling in.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paleha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loose, slack, sagging; shaking, as a loose object.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palehui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brace or bar, in punctuation. lit., joining border.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paleka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carbuncle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palekaiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paradise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palekalapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paragraph.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palekama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>balsam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palekana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>safe, saved, rescued; convalescent; to ward off, brush aside, rescue, protect; to recover from illness; defense, savior, safety, security. (pale₁ + -kana, nominalizer).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paleki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palekoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>petticoat, skirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palekona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>falcon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palela₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, indolent, slow-moving; to saunter along as though bored.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palelei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head covering of tapa wrapped over the head with the ends hanging down in front.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palelona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>furlong, in surveying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palemaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>underdrawers; sometimes used for undershirt. lit., genital protection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palemaʻi o lalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>underdrawers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palemaʻi o luna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>undershirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palemo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to sink, be sunk,
   • slip away, vanish; 
   • drowned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palemo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>promiscuous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palemo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of uhu, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palena ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boundless, without limit, vast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palenaʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land boundary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• boundary, border, 
   • limit, 
   • margin, 
   • juncture, 
   • separation, 
   • partitioning; 
   • terms of a fraction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palepale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup of:
   • pale₁ to ward off, thrust aside, parry...; to parry, as in boxing.
   • pale₂ to deliver, as a child...; 
   • pale₃ to cover, overlay, line; to form a barrier...;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palepiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all species of eucalyptus trees. lit., prevent fever, so called because the leaves were used as fever medicine, and in the pūloʻuloʻu steam bath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palewāwae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the joy weed (Alternanthera amoena), a small herb front Brazil, used as a low border for paths and flower beds. It has red, branching stems and variegated red, green, and yellow, small oval leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palewāwae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, fan-shaped brown seaweeds (two species of Padina [P. commersonii, light-brown, and P. vickersiae, larger, darker-brown]), common on the reef, each fan more or less split and curled. Not eaten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paleʻaʻahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>underclothes, underwear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paleʻili o lalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>underdrawers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paleʻili o luna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>undershirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paleʻōpua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pardon offenses, as by a priest's offering, in pagan times only. lit., ward off billowy clouds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to ward off, warding off, thrust aside, parry, fend off, repulse, resist, 
   • bar, barrier, shield, guard; 
   • defend, defense, 
   • protect; protection,
   • prevent, 
   • to ignore a command or law, 
   • make void, nullify, break, avoid, not adhere to; 
   • curtain (Puk. 26.4) ; partition, 
   • bib, 
   • bar, railing, bulwark,
   • shield, sheath,
   • outer garment.    
(preceded by both ka and ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deliver, as a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• lining, as of a garment; 
   • leaf lining of a ground oven; 
   • flap of a malo; 
   • to cover, overlay, line;
   • to form a barrier.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gunwale lashed to a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an interval of time in music, a bar in music which separates the staff into measures. see below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>presser foot on a sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apron, bib.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barley (Hordeum spp.), bran.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pale₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• division, 
   • canto of a song, 
   • scene of a play, 
   • division of song in a hula
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pali kuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>notched, toothed cliff; joined succession of cliffs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pali kāmoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>low hillock, terrace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pali kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vertical cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pali loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distant or tall cliff. fig., distant, aloof, disdainful; aristocratic, regal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palika₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carbuncle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palikea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endangered gray, yellow, and white Hawaiian honey creeper (Psittirostra bailleui, P. kona); endemic to the island of Hawaiʻi. Its bill is especially suited for opening māmane tree pods. Its only home is on Mauna Kea, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small weak taro shoot (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>primer; to study a primer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palipali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>precipitous, full of cliffs and steep hills.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palipaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palipaʻa maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>base of a cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paloke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glib-tongued, garrulous; gossiping, as maliciously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palolo hua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glib in speech, garrulous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palomeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barometer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>revelation, as from the gods. see (For. 6:4).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parlor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palu lāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti-leaf relish, a term of derision for the people of Hawai'i, because at a feast for Kamehameha I on O'ahu there was not enough food, and the late-comers were said to have had to lick the ti-leaf food wrappings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paluhē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reduced to pulp, as palu; cooked to a pulp; cooked to the point of failing apart, as meat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cooked sweet-potato leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commoner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palunu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a creeping plant (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palunu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dull thud; to thud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paluʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vegetable food. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lick, lap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a relish made of head or stomach of fish, with kukui relish, garlic, chili peppers; fish bait made of fish head or stomach, also used for chumming.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feign ignorance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act the goody-goody.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flu, influenza.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>palūpalū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of yellow tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pamomoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana iʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing spear shot by a bow; to shoot fish thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana kai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flip, as salt water with finger or fingers during a purification ceremony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana kai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to heel over, ts a vessel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tap or snap the head (it was rude or provocative to tap another's head, as the head was sacred).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoot with bow and arrow; archer, archery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana ʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoot rats or mice with bow and arrow, an ancient sport; bow and arrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panaiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diagonal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panakalupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bankrupt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panaleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dexterous, gleeful, quick, as in danger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panalāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>colony, dependency, territory, province (Ezera 4.15) ; colonist. In early times Hāna, Maui, was a panalāʻau (dependency) of Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pananā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, tottering; such a person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panapana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike gently, as the butt of a coconut midrib used as a pole for catching crab.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panapana nīʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoot a coconut leaf midrib (the leaf was bent like a bow and released so that it sprang away).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panapanapuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of shellfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to move up and down as a seesaw;    • to flip along, as a lobster;    • restless, uneasy, always on the move;    • to gad about;    • pulsating motion of male organ;    • a vulgar or contemptuous gesture signifying the latter, made with the fist of one hand, while the other hand grasps the elbow joint, jerking the forearm and clenched fist upwards.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to shoot, as marbles, arrows, bow; 
   • bow and arrows; 
   • to snap, as with fingers and thumb to punish a child; 
   • to flip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heartbeat, pulse; beat in music; to beat time, pulsate, throb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>celebrated, noted, or legendary place; to be such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pana₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bung. (stopper for the opening in a cask).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panehū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paneka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>panther.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panekai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move in, of the tide.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panekalupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bankrupt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>answer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panepane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to retort, talk back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panepoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• pinnacle, summit; 
   • topmost, 
   • most important 
   (preceded by ke). lit., hind part [of] head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paneʻehā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drag, haul.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paneʻeʻūpiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clamp feed, of sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paneʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move along, bring, push along a little; pushed forward.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paneʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• delayed, postponed; delay, postponement; 
   • to do in installments, as to serialize a novel in a newspaper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paneʻe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old, worn-out. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pane₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(preceded by ke). 
   • hind part of the head; 
   • top or summit, as of a mountain
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pane₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pull. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani haka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., closing breach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani hakahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to substitute, fill a vacancy, replace; substitute, replacement, successor, deputy, proxy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>levee, dike, sea wall or any protection against the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani pūpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cat's-eye, operculum, valve or round substance that closes a shell. lit., shell closure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dam, sluice, levee, dike.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani ʻōmole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bottle stopper, cork.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>banyan (Ficus spp.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pronoun. lit., name substitute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa huli ʻauikumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reflexive pronoun (a concept not used in present-day Hawaiian grammars). lit., pronoun reverting to the subject case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa kuhi laulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indefinite pronoun (a rarely used concept), lit., pronoun pointing widely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa kuhikuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., directing pronoun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa kālele manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>emphatic pronoun (a rarely used concept). lit., pronoun that supports thought.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa ninaninau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interrogative pronoun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa pelu hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reflexive pronoun. lit., pronoun folded back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniinoa pilikino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>personal pronoun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coloring matter, as for tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panikū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to slam shut, as a door, to close abruptly, as in slamming a door in one's face; 
   • to foreclose, as a mortgage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panikū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pound, break.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• end, closing, closure, very last, conclusion, finish, cessation, 
   • breaking off or cutting short; 
   • definitive, 
   • classic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plump cheeks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paninikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the name of a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>late var. of paniolo, cowboy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panipani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coition, or to practice such (vulgar).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panipani₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small outrigger canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panipipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cat's-eye. lit., shell closure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plug or wad of a gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniʻole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paniʻole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>substitute, replace, represent, fill a breach or vacancy; substitute, vice- (sometimes preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>odd-shaped pandanus key that fits, like a keystone at the bottom of a pandanus cluster; when this is knocked out, the others fall easily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the bottom of a coconut when cracked off by blows around the base of the nut; it fits like a lid (pani).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disease with severe pain at the solar plexus and choking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pani₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>final bit of food closing a period of treatment by a medical practitioner, commonly but not always sea food; final gift in a hoʻokupu ceremony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark, as clouds; obscure, black, shiny-black, deep blue-black. fig., unapproachable as the unknown, said of very high chiefs believed to be of divine descent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pano paʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glossy, glistening black, sooty-black; black streaks in grain of wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barren, arid, desert, dry, hot, parched.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full of holes, cracked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panohiʻiaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panonono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full of holes, cracks; cracked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panopaʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>somewhat wet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>panunukuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native member of the gourd family (Sicyos cucumerinus), a more or less climbing herb with variable leaves, which range from entire and rounded to many-lobed. The fruit is narrow, about 2.5 cm long, grooved, one-seeded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pao ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stoke a fire; stoker. lit., fire inserter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• strongly odoriferous; 
   • a strong odor, whether pleasant or unpleasant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unlucky, unsuccessful, as in fishing or sex; bad luck. [But cf. iwi paoa under paoa₁.]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paoa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have a taste or desire for (usually used with waha, mouth).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>powder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paokeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slander, betray, defame; slanderer, traitor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paokoke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to betray one's relatives or those close (koke) to one.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paomoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to contend with, make war on,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paona kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>balance, scales. lit., equally placed poundage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paona keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>baby scales.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pound, balance, scales, weight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(preceded by ke).
   • to scoop out, dub out, as a log for a canoe; chisel out, gouge; digging, scooping, etc. 
   • or as of the action of the sea on the coast; undermine, erode, 
   • to peck, 
   • bore. 
   • fig., blunt, cruel, harsh in speech; to rebuke;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to insert, stick in, as wood into a fire; 
   • to stoke, as coal into a furnace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cave, pit, cavern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arch of a bridge, bridge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of the chiefly class; chiefly class.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>work method, plan, stratagem, policy, program, agenda, project; workbench.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremony for the gods, as in offering kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>footboard, used for dancing; treadle. lit., board to step on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa helu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>table, list, enumeration, scoreboard, statistics.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa holahola kānāwai laʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>universally sacred decree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth, planed lumber; grooved board for making ribbed tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa holoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>washboard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foundation of the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hoʻoholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slide plate on a sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hoʻolaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>billboard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hulei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seesaw, teeter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa huli honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>experts who determined land boundaries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa huluhulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough lumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hului₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pile, as of winnings, objects.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hīmeni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choir, choral group.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hōlua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sled composed of two narrow runners, 2 to 6 m long, as used for the hōlua sport.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa hōʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>program, timetable, index, schedule, sign, bulletin board, sign board.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa inoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>list or catalogue of names, register.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa ipu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shelf for food containers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kahuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priestly class.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>division of an army; group of men armed with pololū, spears, surrounding the king.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white stratum, sand beach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa keʻehina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>floor. lit., trampled stratum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa koa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>board of wood of koa, a tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa koa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>group or band (Oih. 10.1)  of soldiers; rank or company of an army.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kuhikuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>table of contents, index, schedule, directory, program, timetable. lit., pointing-out stratum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kuhikuhi manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>schedule, as of ship arrivals and departures.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kuhikuhi mea ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>menu, bill of fare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jawbone, lower plate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kuʻi ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poi-pounding board.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slate, writing board. chalkboard (HE)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kōlea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plover flats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa kōnane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone on which the checkerlike game kōnane was played.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower floor of a house, valley bottom, lower stratum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavenly stratum, heaven and all the spiritual powers; upper regions of the air, upper heavens, firmament.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lele kawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>springboard for diving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lewalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>net used in deep water with the melomelo club.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of the same species, class, rank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa limahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>labor board.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa loio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legal profession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lua hā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two by four lumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second floor or story
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second class.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>board, plank, any large wooden platter, lumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa lāʻau mānoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plank. lit., wide wooden board.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa manamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grate, grating. lit., branching flat surface.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horizontal stratum. fig., sick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa mānoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa niho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>row of teeth, set of teeth; jaw, bridge for false teeth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bench.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breadboard; cake (Ier. 7.18) ; pancake, wafer (rare).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa palapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>writing desk, board, or flat surface where writing is done.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• salt flat. 
   • fig., sour disposition.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa paʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>printing press.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa pelena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a flat cake. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the leading division, class, rank, especially the first company of warriors sent out to plunder in order to provoke war. lit., head rank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa puʻukani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choir, choral group.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa pāʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>table for eating.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa pōhaku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>row or tier of stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa pōhaku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slate, stone tablet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa pōhaku₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone table, stone flat, or stone surface, as for pounding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa uhi waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>board used to cover space forward of the forward outrigger boom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa waena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>middle floor or story; middle class or layer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa waha nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large baglike net used for akule fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa wili ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixing board, food trough, board for kneading poi, kneading trough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa wili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixing board or tray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa ʻaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dining table; 
   • eating mat, as laid on the floor; 
   • meal, dinner, mess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa ʻiliʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arrangement of pebbles in the form of a man used for instruction by a kahuna hāhā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa ʻohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>draft board, selection board.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papahele o luna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upper floor, upstairs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papahola₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>face of a clock or watch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papahola₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>level pavement beside a heiau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papahola₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priests who prohibited noise during taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papahola₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>division of spoils among the victors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lattice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to push.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papahāpuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish, possibly a hāpuʻu (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaioa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long reef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaiāulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow, rise, as a breeze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacrifice; propitiatory offering or food offering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papakema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>baptism.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papakōnane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mat design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papakū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foundation or surface, as of the earth; floor, as of ocean; bed, as of a stream; bottom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papakū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upright (this is said in answer to the question "pehea ʻoe?" and means "I'm fine").
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papakū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a disease with severe constipation (AP) or accompanied by vomiting, back pains, belching, red eyes (Ka Leo a ka Lahui, Feb. 7, 1893).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papalaulele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small net, as for fishing in shallow water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fending off, warding off, pushing aside.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small cliff or slope, as along a ravine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papamū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stone on which the checkerlike game, kōnane, was played; 
   • checkerboard;
   • plaid; 
   • checkered, as gingham.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papamū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interception, shutting off, as from view; to block.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young stage of nenue, rudder fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papapau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of papau, deeply engaged... finished... united...;  everyone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papapueo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, grown on Maui; petioles deep-pink at base, grading to light-pink and green with white edge; corm used for poi. lit., owl flat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papapū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>row or tier of guns, class of guns.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papapū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>completely covered, as rocks by shellfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• deeply engaged, as in an activity; engrossed, absorbed, 
   • finished; 
   • united; all, all together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papau make</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to die, of many; complete annihilation; cemetery (rare).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaʻaiana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ironing board.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaʻauwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower jaw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tight, secure, especially of a walled stronghold;    • to hold back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irregularly cut, of hair, said to be named for an irregular haircut given to Pikoiakaʻalalā (a demigod born of a crow father, who sometimes appeared as a rat) by his rat sisters, and short for paʻipaʻi ʻiole, rat haircut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaʻohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of akule, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mat motif consisting of a row of opposing triangles with their apices touching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papaʻunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fill up, cram.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native-born, especially for several generations (see noho papa₂); offspring of the mating of an individual of piʻo, naha, or nīʻaupiʻo rank, with one of kaukaualiʻi rank; the lowest ranking aristocrat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>set close together, thick together, as of growing plants; in unison, all together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava. The name may be qualified by the colors ʻeleʻele, kea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>middle portion of a fishing net, bag net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone used as sinker for lūheʻe, octopus lure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papa₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wafer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papekema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to baptize, baptismal; baptism. also papakema.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papekiko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to baptize; baptismal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papulo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>papyrus, rush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>baboon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white spray, as of sea; to rise in spray; white caps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papākolea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break, of waves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papālina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheek, cheeks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>papā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to blow, as the wind; 
   • to sound, echo; 
   • to shine, as sun or moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>destruction by fire, burned; to put out a fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau hananuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plump, wadding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armistice, truce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau lehia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>expert; to be such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all, everything, to have all.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all (followed by qualifying verb or noun).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>completely finished, terminated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau pāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very black, dirty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• all together, including all; 
   • completely demolished, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau ā pau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>everyone, all the people (as with the idea of participating in a previously stated act).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau ʻeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very dirty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>endless, unceasing, always.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau ʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very delicious, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>out of breath, breathless, gasping for breath, panting, worn out. fig., discouraged, faint-hearted, despairing, desperate, weary, exhausted; to die.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare crab.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, extinct in Kona and Kāʻū, Hawaiʻi; petiole dark-green, becoming whitish above; corm white, long-keeping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauka kī pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gun powder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all taken, consumed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>powder; to powder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>curved. fig., dishonest, deceitful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fast, speedily; speed; to do with great speed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukū kino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>body trunk, torso.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukū manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portion of time, era.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukū pālahalaha lahilahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slab. lit., thin flat portion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukū ʻolokaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cylinder. lit., revolving section.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• section, link, piece; jointed, linked.
   • stanza, verse, as in the Bible; canto; article, as of law; paragraph; 
   • to section off, cut in sections, slice in sections; 
   • to make a lei with sections of different colors, as feathers, or roses and begonias; 
   • land section smaller than a moʻo (Thrum, p. 68); 
   • a unit of measurement; 
   • a squad (military; see mokuna);
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paukū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>root of the kāʻeʻe vine, used medicinally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>powder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paulehia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to be overwhelmed (Kel. 107); 
   • completely, totally immersed, absorbed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paulele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faith, confidence, trust; to have faith, confidence, to believe implicitly; to lean against, rely on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paulinalina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gird the waist tightly, to stretch, make taut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paulāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to walk over the sea or fire, as a god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauma wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water pump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paumaunoʻonoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>keepsake, memento. lit., all continuing thoughts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauma₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pump; to pump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paumākō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grief, mourning, lamentation; to weep loudly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paumāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, defiled, sordid, unclean.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauneʻineʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excited; to cry out, as in excitement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paunihinihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, worthless taro shoots.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fern (Dryopteris squamigera) to 90 cm or more high, the stem clothed with tan scales, the frond triangular to ovate and two or three times pinnate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauāʻālina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavy, burdensome.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauʻakaʻaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neck in a house rafter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauʻaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grotesque, odd.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauʻaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>damaging; unreliable, deceitful; to disturb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauʻaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of no use, fruitless, unproductive, without reward or profit, discouraging.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauʻaka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quail, so called because of its song.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauʻali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crooked, perverse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pauʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>said to be (used in special idioms, unfavorably).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the darkness just before dawn, predawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth, fat and sleek.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pawa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>custom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paūhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, narrow-chested.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa ipu kuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bearer of the chief's spittoon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa kāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bearer of the royal feather standard; to carry a kāhili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa kāmaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pair of shoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>those holding a lau, dragnet; to hold the lau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>held in the hand; handle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>team of horses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa luhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overcome with weariness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>married couple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa male hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bridal couple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>firm in one's memory; memorized.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa mau noʻonoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a keepsake, memento; to keep a thought of something. lit., hold continued thinking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa mau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>regular, customary, usual. lit., continually fixed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa moʻolelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>versed in lore, legends, history, tradition; documented in such; one so versed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ready-made, as clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>globe, circular solid, sphere. lit., round solid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa uma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of hand wrestling in which each player tried to push his opponent's hand back to his chest (uma); to wrestle thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa walu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>octagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa ʻahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a carrier of mats (Kep. 129), a heap of mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>landholder; to hold land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻahana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• industrious, busy, hard-working; 
   • workman, laborer, worker, industry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻahana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>implement, tool, utensil, furnishings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻahao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prisoner, convict; to be imprisoned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻahao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proceeds (as pigs, sweet potatoes or taro) paid to holders of land on which tenants worked; penalty for failure to pay was imprisonment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻahihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spread here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻahiku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heptagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻailalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the earth below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻailuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavens above.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakai hao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>copperas. [iron (II) sulfate]. Ka Hae Hawaii, May 13, 1857
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakai holoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lye (RSV), nitre (KJV) lit., washing salt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakai hoʻohanuhanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smelling salts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakai inu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>epsom salts. lit., drinking salt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakai mikomiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakai muʻemuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alum. lit., bitter salt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakaiheleleʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish, said to be one of the Hemiramphidae. lit., scattered salt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakaihū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>effervescent solution.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, usually grown in the uplands, the plant short and stocky; petioles dark-green, edged with red; corm flesh white, used chiefly for poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• limestone, 
   • coral beds, as found on the leeward sides of the islands. 
    lit., white hardness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dry lowland plain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻakūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jell, set firmly, congeal; to clot, as blood; to stiffen, as hard poi; avaricious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• attendants of a chief;
   • bridal attendants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pentagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>keepsake, memento, souvenir.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suit of clothes. also paʻalole komo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalole makalike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uniform, as of military.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deuce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• formal, 
   • according to rule, 
   • decorous; 
   • to observe rules, as of etiquette; one who observes such rules.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻalā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth, water-worn ʻalā rock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻamua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gaseous condition of the bowels, to have such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻamua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dam, windbreak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻamua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steadfast in prayer for the welfare of the family, one so steadfast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻanaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>memorized, remembered. lit., fixed intestines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaoloulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young loulu palm leaves, as used in making hats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hexagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salt-encrusted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>playful, to play frequently.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻanā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ease, as pain; to soothe; to entertain, amuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻanā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hurry, hasten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻaʻina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brittle, crisp, crackling; to snap, crackle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻaʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻaʻina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dispute, argument, quarrel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (Dascyllus albisella).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapaʻa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻapū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• covered with, solid with, teeming with, 
   • crowded, congested, as people, fog, or clouds; 
   • dense, impervious, nonporous; 
   • stifling, stuffy, as a room; 
   • thick or coarse, of banana fruit peeling (HP 173).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard physical labor or drudgery; a drudge (perhaps contraction of paʻa, hold, and uaua, tough); to work hard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻawaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gag; to gag the mouth. lit., make the mouth solid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻawela₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a burned area; a scar from burning; to burn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻawela₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably a wrasse fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a solid, usually with number of sides following, as paʻaʻili hā. lit., surface solid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili hā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>four-sided solid (this term was said to be used formerly for a pyramid).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili hā like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paʻaʻili [a solid, usually with number of sides following] with equal sides.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili iwakālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a twenty-sided solid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili kaulike hiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oblique parallelepiped. lit., solid leaning similarly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili kūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cube or rectangular parallelepiped. lit., straight solid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili ono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>six-sided solid, cube; cubic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻili ono like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cube. lit., equal six solid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻiliʻumi kumamālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a twelve-sided solid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻaʻā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fiber, as of sugar-cane stalk or of banana sheath (probably a contraction of paʻa, solid, and ʻaʻa, fiber).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pair, couple; couplet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suit of clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stratum, foundation, especially paʻailalo, earth, and paʻailuna, heavens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extremity, border.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of sweet potato, pronunciation not certain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pocket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• crooked, misshapen, 
   • bent, 
   • uneven, odd, 
   • imperfect; 
   • wrong, incorrect; error, mistake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi aʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>root system, rootlets, small branches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi hakahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>printing, as contrasted with handwriting (kākau); form, questionnaire; blank, as on a questionnaire. lit., space printing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thatch or line a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>misprint, typographical error; to make such an error. lit., mistaken printing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi hua piku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cake of figs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi hua waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster of grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi hua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle of fruit; fruit cluster, as of grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi hua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bulge, as in canoe sides.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>equal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi kinipōpō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>baseball bat, tennis racquet; to hit a ball.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take pictures, photographs; photographer. lit., snap pictures.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi koli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trim, cut short.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of dark tapa cloth dyed with juice from kukui bark, said to be from Hālawa, Molokaʻi (Ii 83). According to (And), a pale yellow tapa made on Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cakes of fine flour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi palapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>printing press; to print.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi pelena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi puna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whitewash, plaster. lit., to slap coral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi umauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chest-slapping hula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster of grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a draw or tie; to have a draw or tie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi ā paʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>equal, as of two persons; to tie, have a draw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard, pounded but undiluted taro; heavy, as poorly made cake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi ʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>printing, edition.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi ʻuala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cooked and compressed sweet potatoes allowed to ferment slightly and used as a substitute for poi when poi was scarce. Also poi ʻuala by analogy with poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporarily deaf, as from ascending to a high altitude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻia kuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deafening.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻiaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• clear, bright, cloudless; 
   • neat, tidy, 
   • well dressed in one's best; 
   • to honor; 
   • set, as a ship's sails (often preceded by hao ā).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻilauʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dry pandanus leaves still clinging to the tree. lit., cut red leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻimalau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Portuguese man-of-war (Physalia). jellyfish (HE)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻimalau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fleet of canoes fishing for aku with the malau, bait carrier.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crackle, snap, click, tick, pop, resound; crackling, etc; brittle, easily torn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiʻi Island name for pohā₂, cape gooseberry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻiniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>some native Hawaiian lilies (Astelia spp) with long, narrow, silvery or tan leaves forming rosette-shaped plants growing either on the ground or perching on trees. Small yellow or greenish flowers develop in a panicle on a stalk shorter than the leaves. Formerly, Hawaiians braided hat leis out of the shiny outer layer of the leaves and wore them as a sign that they had visited Kīlauea Volcano, where one species is common. Also used, rarely, for house thatch (For. 5:655).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻiniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a very thin type of tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻipaʻi lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clap, applaud; applause, clapping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻipaʻinahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa cloak worn over the shoulder like a cape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻipaʻiʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rat haircut. said to be named for an irregular haircut given to Pikoiakaʻalalā (a demigod born of a crow father, who sometimes appeared as a rat) by his rat sisters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻipaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to applaud, clap; applause; 
   • to sprinkle coloring matter (as charcoal or red cloth) on tapa and beat it in.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻipaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed, diluted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻipaʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trim, prune, cut, clip, as a plant or the hair; to strip off, as leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻipunahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fete a favorite (punahele), especially by composing songs in his honor, and staging dances and feasts for him; an expression of love for a favorite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻiua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine, white tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻiāuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slap the chest, as in grief. fig., to show grief, wail in lamentation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻiʻula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa made by beating red rags or tapa pieces to form a mixture of white and red (as outer or kilohana sheet for bedcovers). also welu ʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻiʻula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calabash receptacle for sarongs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to slap, spank, beat, hit, clap; a slapping, slap,
   • to print, publish; stamping, printing 
   • to snap, as pictures; 
   • to break, as a taboo; 

(several old types of tapa begin with paʻi: paʻipaʻinahā, paʻiua, paʻiʻula; preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a heap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to evict, as from land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tie; a draw; equal; to make an agreement (said to be so called because champions slapped each other's open palms after they had agreed on the terms of a match or race, and with a draw it was as though they had no more than concluded the terms).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mix, as ingredients; to mingle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put clothes to soak, as in soapy water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bundle, package, especially of food; to tie up such a bundle; bunch, cluster, as of grapes (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip, as bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lining, as of pandanus or sugar-cane leaves, inside thatching of pili grass; to line thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻi₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decaying, of fruits or plants; blight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻopaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of ulua, a fish (Caranx speciosus); green and yellow with vertical green bands; considered one of the best fishes for eating raw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻu ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soot, black cindery sand or ash. lit., fire soot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻu hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>constantly at work, drudgery,: tedious, prolonged work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻuhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• overcome with sleep; 
   • overwhelmed with desire; 
   • overtaken by evil or calamity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• soot, sooty.
   • smudge; 
   • ink dregs; ink powder; 
   • ink used for tattooing made of burned kukui shells; 
   • tar-colored excrement as resulting from hemorrhage;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drudgery, slaving; tedious and laborious work, toil; toilsome.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike the ear, as a distant sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻē pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sound together, a deafening roar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻēpaʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to publicize.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>moist, damp, soaked, drenched, moldy. also maʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>paʻūpaʻū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overlaid tapa (Kam. 76:115) said to be so called because it was wet during its manufacture; sometimes worn by dancers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pekania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bethany.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pekekaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bethsaida.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pekela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bethel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pekelehema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bethlehem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pekelopolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Petersburg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pekina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Peking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Peleiake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pleiades.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelekane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Britain, British, England, English, Englishman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelekane Nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Great Britain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelekania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Britain; British.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelekepulikano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Presbyterian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelekia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Persia; Persian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelekiuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Belgium; Belgian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelekunu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wet valley, north Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelelina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Berlin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Peleminahama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Birmingham.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pele₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>volcano goddess... The volcano goddess born as a flame in the mouth of Haumea. Epithets coupled with her name include Honuamea (reddish earth), Kawahine'aihonua (the earth eating woman), Kawahineokalua (the woman of the pit), and, rarely, Kawahineokaʻaʻahukeʻokeʻo (the woman with the white garment). Countless stories attribute rocks and land forms to Pele's wrath. Before settling at Kīlauea, she dug craters now extinct — Diamond Head, Punch Bowl, Koko Crater, Salt Lake, Haleakalā, and many others. She appeared at different times as fire, a wrinkled hag, a child, and a beautiful girl. She is sometimes called a malihini who came from Kahiki.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelimuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Plymouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelukia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Prussia; Prussian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pelukia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Phrygia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Penekala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bengal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Penekekoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pentecost; Pentecostal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Peolia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Peoria.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Peʻehala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind associated with Hāmākua, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Peʻepāpōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a rain associated with Kaupō, Maui. lit., hide [at the] stone wall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Peʻepūhalahīnano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pe neia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pe kēia, penei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pe-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>like, resembling (in the demonstratives pēia, pēlā, pēnā, penei and pehea).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beaver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peawini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fair wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fair, carnival, exhibit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pear, avocado (Persea americana).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>behemoth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>owl snare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsteady.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to throw, throw at, pelt; 
   • an overhand throw, as in throwing the ʻulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>throwing; pelting, as of rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehu holokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swelling of entire body.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehu kumu niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swelling of lower limbs.  lit., coconut tree swelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehu pala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scab (Kanl. 28.27) , scurvy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehuakoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa colored with an infusion made of koa bark. lit., koa swelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehuea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to increase in volume, of the wind; such an increase.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• swollen; distended; swelling; to swell; 
   • dropsy, edema. 
   • fig., swollen with pride or conceit; 
   • longing to eat, hunger (short for makapehu, eyes big with hunger). 
Types of pehu, dropsy, were qualified by the terms ale ʻai, food gulping; kālaʻe, clearing. see wāwae pehu (gout, swollen legs or feet), and below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pehē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to peel off, pare, strip; to remove skin or bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekalakelia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>harp (RSV), psaltery (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peccary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pagan, heathen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekapeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tattle, tell tales, act as stool pigeon; tattler, stool pigeon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bekah (ancient Hebrew unit of weight).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekekue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blunt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekelala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>federal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekepeke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ridge (?).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dwarf, brownie, elf, goblin, midget; 
   • dwarfish, minute;  tiny.
   • short, as steps or stitches;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekikini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to present, as arms (petikini i nā pū).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pace; to move along step by step, to tread along, trudge along, jog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to back up, as a car.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spade, as in playing cards.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kick; to kick., to ward off, as a spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>picul, as used for the sale of sandalwood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekunia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>petunias (Petunia xhybrida), garden herbs grown for their bright, attractive, funnel-shaped flowers of various colors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pekupeku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of peku, a kick; to kick., to ward off, as a spear.  to flick out, as bark while scraping olonā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pela moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mattress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pela uea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bedsprings (later replaced by pilina). lit., wire bale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pela uluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pillow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelakano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plane tree (RSV), chestnut (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelamika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pyramid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plane tree (RSV), chestnut (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelapela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>filthy, dirty, nasty, indecent, unclean, vulgar, lewd, obscene.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pela₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fertilizer, any decomposed material, especially decayed flesh and intestines removed from a corpse; the bones were buried secretly, and the flesh (pela) thrown into the sea (cf. kapa lau).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pela₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bale; to bale; mattress, cushion; package, as of hard poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pela₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bail; to bail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pela₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelehū kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turkey gobbler.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelehū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turkey (Meleagris gallopavo). lit., swollen swelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelekana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pelican.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peleka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perch, in surveying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peleka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spelt (RSV), fitch (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peleki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brake; to apply brakes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelekikena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>president; presidential.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelekona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelekunu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>musty, moldy, or rank odor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peleleu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• extended, either longitudinally or horizontally;
   • long, broad, wide, as a nose; 
   • spreading, extending;
   • extension, projection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelemakani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>propeller, as of an airplane. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crackers, biscuit, bread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelena paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hardtack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelepulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soaked, drenched, as by rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peleʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mildewed; wet, rotting, and vile-smelling, as of clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lava flow, volcano, eruption; volcanic (named for the volcano goddess, Pele).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, swollen, fat; pounded or kneaded soft, as poi or dough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choice Kauaʻi tapa (FS 252–3), scented with maile and kūpaoa, said to be gray and dyed with charcoal made of burned sugar cane mixed with coconut water (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a term qualifying koʻi (adze), similar to kūpele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pele₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peliala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>friar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelihele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>periphery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>covenant, bond (formerly said of matrimony).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelikana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pelican.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>counterfeit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flatter, tell tall tales, lie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peloka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perch, rod, pole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peloni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>felony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peluhāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelukia ʻakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Prussic acid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelukua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn about; to turn and go back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peluliahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of kīhei shawl dyed with sandalwood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelulo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beryl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peluluka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rotting, of crops (Malo 199, Emerson note); to soak and squeeze, as in preparing pia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fold, turn over or under, bend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hem, tuck, as in a dress; to take a tuck, hem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn and go.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pelēpelē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boxing, fighting for sport.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pena hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house paint; house painter; to paint a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pena kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to paint pictures; picture painter; water colors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pena mikiʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fingernail polish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paint; to paint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>package.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pena₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Maui word for nīele, curious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>this way, like this, for instance, so, thus, as follows; to be thus (more definite than pēia).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penekine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>benzine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penekuina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>penguin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penekū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reside at a place for several generations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pene₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reside a long time in one place. Kaʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peni kila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steel pen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penikenia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sacrament of confession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penikila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>painkiller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peni₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>penny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soaked, drenched; to soak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penopeno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, smutty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>penu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to sop up, as gravy; 
   • to dunk; 
   • to dab up, as tears.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vagina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round, globular.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa hahau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>playing cards. lit., striking cards.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wallpaper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa hoʻokē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kleenex or paper handkerchief. lit., nose-blowing paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa hoʻololi kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a transfer authorizing change from one vehicle to another. lit., paper changing cars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa hoʻomaloʻo ʻīnika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blotter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa hoʻonani hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wallpaper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa hāleu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toilet paper, lit., cleansing paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa kahakaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scratch paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa kalakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sandpaper. lit., rough paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joker, in a deck of cards. lit., picture card.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa kope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carbon paper, Xerox.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa kīkoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>check or draft for paying money. lit., withdrawing paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa kīkoʻo kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>money order.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa lahilahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tissue paper, thin paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crepe paper, as used in lei making. lit., lei paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa mānoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cardboard. lit., thick paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa paʻi kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>photographic film.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa poʻoleka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>postcard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa wahī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wrapping paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa ʻomoʻīnika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blotter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepakene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Cayenne pepper (Capsicum annuum cv. ‘longum’).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepamina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peppermint (Mentha piperita).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black or white pepper, produced from the fruit of a climbing Oriental shrub (Piper nigrum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepehi kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>murder, murderer, manslaughter; to commit murder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepehi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beat, strike, pound, kill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepehi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surface of a tapa beater formed by deep grooves with the wide ridges (up to 14) rounded off in the form of an inverted U; sometimes the beater itself was so called.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao akua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tree fungus, the Jew's-ear (Auricularia auricula).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao hohono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>infected ear; said derisively of farmers with reference to the smoky odor (hohono) of their fires.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao kuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a deaf ear, deafness, disobedience, refusal to listen to advice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., tree ear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao ʻeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>earache.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiaohao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horn of an animal; trumpet or horn made of an animal's horn. (Hal. 118.27)  lit., iron ear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cotyledon, as of beans.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stipule, as of noni, a tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scallops in lace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lugs or blocks inside a canoe hull to which the ʻiako, booms, and perhaps the mast (For. 5:633) are fastened.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>comb cleats for canoe thwarts or seats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Chinese cake stuffed with meat, named for a resemblance to an ear. cf. cup-shaped mea ʻono puaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long nets 30 to 37 m deep, attached at each side of the ʻupena kolo, bag net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeiao₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>valve of the heart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeieʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overripe breadfruit or banana kneaded with coconut cream, wrapped in ti leaves, and baked in the oven. This could be preserved for a season.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepelu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>repetitious in speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard, thick, disobedient.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeʻe paka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tobacco plug.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeʻekue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• coarse, as lace or hair; 
   • thick; 
   • clumsy, lumbering, as a puppy's feet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twisted, crooked, deformed, misshapen, out of shape; deformity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepeʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young fern leaves, as of hāpuʻu, hōʻiʻo, and ʻamaʻu, that are rolled up, sometimes suggesting a question mark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flat, as a nose; low, squatty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, fine-meshed, as of a mat. pepepe is more common.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pepe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(Emerson) however gives "canoe seat" (UL 194) and "chock on which a canoe rests" (PH 114).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dull, blunt. fig., stupid, dull.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to thrust up, push up, 
   • root, uproot, 
   • prod, bunt, 
   • nudge upward, elbow upward, 
   • pout, 
   • jostle with the feet as to attract attention; 
   • to rise up, as grass that has been trod upon; 
   • to thrust, as a male in coition.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a vulgar gesture, in which the fist is doubled and jerked upward; to make the gesture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cartilage of a pig's nose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>point at canoe bow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pewapewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pectoral fins of a fish; to move or vibrate these fins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tail of fish, shrimp, lobster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rectangular patch or wedge used for mending bowls, perhaps so called because of a resemblance to a fishtail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pewa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>usually following huli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pewa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clump or group, as of trees near a forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa heke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>triangular sail set above the gaff; topsail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mainsail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa ihu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jib sail. lit., bow sail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mainsail. lit., big sail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa oe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long sail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻahi lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• the open hand, 
   • a hand's breadth (Ezek. 40.5) ; 
   • to beckon or wave with the hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻahi uila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>electric fan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fan; to fan, brush, wave, signal, beckon, winnow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the open hand, bones of the hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻahi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Microsorium spectrum syn. Polypodium spectrum) about 30 cm high, the fronds broad, pointed, commonly three-lobed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻahi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dark-colored stone with grain said to suggest the fingers of a hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a trusted relative of a chief who attends to his personal needs. lit., back-cross, so called because such a person might go behind the back of the chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻapeʻa pōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heap of pebbles, as at the opening of an octopus burrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻapeʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crossing. fig., entangled, perplexity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻapeʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian bat (Lasiurus cinereus).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻapeʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small peʻa, starfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻapeʻa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>filthy, unclean; slime.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a cross (X-shaped; cf. the Christian cross, keʻa); 
   • to cross, as the hands or arms; 
   • to cross and tie; 
   • to turn and go.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>base of a leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bat. cf. more common ʻōpeʻapeʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>starfish, various species of Asteroidea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sail, as of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forks or branches made of stalks of feathers bound at their bases with ʻieʻie roots, coming together to form the koʻo (stalk) which in turn is attached to the kāhili staff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boundary, edge, border, as of land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• menstruating,  to menstruate.
   • unclean, 
   • tattered (FS 167);
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻa₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti-leaf thatch bundle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻe pao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who hides in a cave; to hide in a cave; secret cave; term of contempt for vagabonds or cowards.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻe poli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hide in one's bosom, as a secret; secretive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻelua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caterpillar (2-Oihn. 6.28) ; (KL. line 287); army worm (Cirphis unipuncta).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻelua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brindled, striped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻelulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>confusing; confusion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻeone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sand crab that buries itself backwards in wet sand (Hippa pacifica). lit., sand hiding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻepeʻe kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the game of hide-and-seek; to play the game (short for peʻepeʻe akua, hiding ghost).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻepeʻemakawalu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large house spider.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻepeʻemakawalu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻepeʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻepeʻe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of an ancient illness (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coarse, thick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>peʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pikina Hila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Beacon Hill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pikoiakaʻalalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a demigod born at Wailua, Kauaʻi, of a crow (ʻalalā ) father, and with rat (ʻiole) and bat (ʻōpeʻapeʻa) sisters. He was carried out to sea and to Kou (Honolulu) where he won contests in rat-shooting and in riddling. He sometimes appeared as a rat. lit., Pikoi son of the crow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pilihala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Kaʻawaloa, Hawaiʻi. lit., near pandanus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pilikane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Brittany.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pililua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a pair of stars, said to bring ʻōpelu fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pilimaiʻuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting. lit., clinging to fingernail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pilinahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Piliʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name, Kanikū, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pinilana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Finland, Finnish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia maka hinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of stone used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia manioka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>starch made of manioc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small fish, as ʻōhua manini.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piaia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young manini fish. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piano.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piapia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• the encrusted white matter in the eyes, as from sleeping or sore eyes, "sand" in the eyes; to get such matter in the eyes; 
   • an abusive epithet applied to one who was unwashed, said to refer to genitals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piapia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piapia₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Polynesian arrowroot (Tacca leontopetaloides, formerly known as T. pinnatifida), an herb known in the eastern tropics, formerly cultivated in Hawaiʻi for the starchy tubers, which were used for medicine and food. In spring or summer, a few leaves rise on long stems from a tuber and die back in the winter. The blades are much divided, about 30 cm wide, somewhat like papaya leaves in shape. (HP 212), (Neal 228–9).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for starch; starch made from arrowroot is called pia Hawaiʻi to distinguish from other starches; pia is used in haupia pudding, as medicine, and as talcum powder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pale yellow. cf. hala pia, a pandanus, and hēpia, of the ʻilima flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of stone, as used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pia₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stork.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pie ueue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eczema, a name for kauā, outcasts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mattery eruptions or eczema on the scalp; to have such eruptions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trade, peddle; trader, peddler.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pudding of grated taro, sweet potato, yam, banana, or breadfruit, baked in ti leaves with coconut cream.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offensive to smell, stinking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piepiele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do small favors in order to receive greater ones; to flatter or fawn in order to receive something.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piha lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piha makahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yearly anniversary; to have an annual anniversary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piha pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>completely full, complete.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piha puna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spoonful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piha pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>completely filled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piha ʻeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirited, enthusiastic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihakuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brimful, jammed full, packed tight, crowded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fullness, filling up, completion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>silent, weak-voiced.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihapiha ʻāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihapiha ʻō koholā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pleated ruffle. lit., whaler's ruffle, so called because such ruffles were stylish in whaling days.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihapiha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• full, complete; filled; 
   • full and flowing, as a garment; 
   • filed, as cards; 
   • completed, as a questionnaire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihapiha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gills of a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihapiha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruffle, fringe, as on a dress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihaweuweu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporary bed made of dry ʻilima branches, dried banana leaves and grasses, over which a mat or two were spread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihaweuweu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full of grass, but thin, said of a grass-eating animal that does not put on flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihaʻekelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mynah bird (Acridotheres tristis), introduced from India in 1865. lit., full of ʻekelo sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihaʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jam-packed, packed tight, full, crammed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• din of voices, 
   • crying, shouting, 
   • wailing, lamentation; 
   • to mourn, shout, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihi pūlima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cuff button.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihipihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scarred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihipihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any small objects shaped like buttons, as washers (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihipihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to skip stones on the surface of the water; stone skipping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scab, scar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>button, badge; to button (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blunt, dull, as a wooden digging stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizzy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hairy, fuzzy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihōpihō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bob up and down or swamp, as a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pihō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swamp, mire; swampy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pika pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flower container, vase. lit., flower pitcher.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pika wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water pitcher.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikakani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rattlebox (Crotalaria pallida, formerly known as C. mucronata), known in many tropical countries, a small, weedy, shrubby legume with three-parted leaves, yellow flowers striped with red, and many-seeded pods to 5 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikanini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small (slang, from pickaninny).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikapika₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suction cups on octopus tentacles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikapika₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of lava rock with points said to resemble the suction cups of an octopus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikapika₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variegated, spotted; of varying colors, as the ocean.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pick up, as a rooster picks up food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pika₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pitcher, vase.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pika₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beet (Beta vulgaris).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pika₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>picul; half.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pika₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hot, as peppery food (said in pidgin Eng.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikekakio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pistachio (Pistacia vera).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pitcher.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikimana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bituminous; coal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikineki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>business.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikiniki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>picnic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikipikiʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough, stormy, choppy, as the sea. fig., agitated in spirit. cf.
     kūpikiʻō agitated, raging, turbulent, as wind or storm...
     kūpikipikiʻō redup. of kūpikiʻō, agitated, raging, turbulent...
     hoʻokūpikiʻō caus/sim of kūpikiʻō, agitated, raging, turbulent...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikipiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pinch or squeeze, as in milking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shrunk, shortened, irregular.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the peach (Prunus persica), possibly a native of China, introduced to Hawaiʻi but not common.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro widely planted; an important poi taro, especially on Oʻahu, distinguished by whitish piko and by leaf stems light-green with pinkish base. also piko keʻokeʻo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko lehua ʻāpiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro, with leaves dark-green and crinkled below; the corms with lilac-purple flesh, yielding the popular lehua red poi; the leaves good for lūʻau. lit., curly red piko taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double crown of the head, a sign that a child will be persevering and determined.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko pau ʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rat-taken navel cord, i.e., a chronic thief. It was believed that one became a chronic thief if his navel cord was stolen by a rat. Rats were famous for thieving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko uaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro, one of the hardiest piko taros and perhaps the only kind common in upland culture; yields good grade light-colored poi; distinguished by dark-green leaf stems with a pinkish base.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro, with darkpurple petioles; common poi and table taro; the leaves are good for lūʻau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro, distinguished from piko lehua ʻāpiʻi by having leaves smooth below; corms yield red poi of good grade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikoholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slipknot. lit., loop rope-end.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikoohaleakalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of braid used in the pāpale ʻie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikoowākea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Equator.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• navel, 
   • navel string, umbilical cord. 
   • fig., blood relative, genitals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• summit or top of a hill or mountain; 
   • crest; crown of the head; 
   • crown of the hat made on a frame (pāpale pahu); 
   • tip of the ear; 
   • end of a rope; 
   • border of a land; 
   • center, as of a fishpond wall or kōnane board; 
   • place where a stem is attached to the leaf, as of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a common taro with many varieties, all with the leaf blade indented at the base up to the piko, junction of blade and stem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design in plaiting the hat called pāpale ʻie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bottom round of a carrying net, kōkō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small wauke rootlets from an old plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piko₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatch above a door.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fig (Ficus carica).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pikumena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila haʻawina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>appropriation, allotment bill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila hāpa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>autoharp. lit., fiddle harp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila hōʻaiʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>promissory note. lit., bill to extend credit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila koi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>requisition.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila kuolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>violin. lit., rubbing fiddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila kīkoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>check, draft, bill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila kīkoʻo hale leka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>money order. lit., post-office draft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila kīkoʻo hoʻohuihui ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blanket warrant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila puhipuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>harmonica, mouth organ. lit., blowing fiddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila ʻaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>string musical instrument.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila ʻaiʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>voucher.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilapilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>somewhat bad-smelling, not quite spoiled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilawaiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>account, reckoning, as of an estate; invoice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilaʻumeʻume</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>accordion. lit., tugging fiddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any string instrument, formerly the fiddle; violin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bill; to make out a bill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fir.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pila₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to build, in a card game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house shingle (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili hao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corrugated iron, as used for roofing (preceded by ke). lit., iron shingles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili hihia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to become involved in gambling, usually disastrously; in the old days, to bet one's life or wife; to be involved in an entangling affair of any sort.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili hoʻoipoipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>love affair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili koke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be closely related; to be very close, intimate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blood relationship, blood relative; related by blood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cling to the back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili kāmau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>relationship by friendship rather than by blood or adoption. lit., added-on relative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili kāpekepeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uncertain relationship
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili laulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of wide application, of broad or general interest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a guessing game: to guess the contents of another's folded hand. lit., wager hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili loko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a close relative, closely related; concerning local places.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a close companionship of two; to associate, of two; related in two ways.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili lāʻau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden house shingle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili lāʻau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edge of a forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elder relative; preferred friend or companion; former associate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili nohona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>family or social structure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shingle roofing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stick firmly, 
   • associate constantly; 
   • to live in harmony; 
   • to fit closely, 
   • tenacious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili piula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corrugated iron roofing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili poli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be close to the bosom or heart (affectionate).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>well-suited, well-matched; close-fitting, as clothes; to refer exactly or concisely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to unite, join, 
   • cling to; 
   • hard-pressed, as in danger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili uka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stiff, tufted, native grass (Trisetum glomeratum), 0.3 to 0.9 m high, with leaves 10.2 to 25 cm long and flowers crowded in narrow spikes; a good forage grass, growing only at rather high altitudes. On Hawaiʻi this is apparently called heʻupueo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cling, etc., for no reason or cause; often used in unfavorable sense of living off other people.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili ā moʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cling like a lizard, as on a cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili ʻana wā anō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gram. present participle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili ʻana wā hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gram. past participle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili ʻano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to resemble in character or nature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unrelated, not concerned with.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili ʻuhane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spiritual.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilialo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bosom friend, beloved wife.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilialoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>close friendship, beloved companionship, beloved relative; loving association; to have a loving or tender relationship, to be in a bond of love, romance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilihua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sad, sorrowful, dejected, 
   • astonished, 
   • confused (Ier. 14.9) ,
   • bewitched (Oih. 8.9) ; 
   • weary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikahakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shore, especially the area between high and low tides; near the shore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a vine (Stictocardia tiliaefolia) in the morning-glory family, native from India eastward, possibly into Polynesia, long known in Hawaiʻi, as on roadsides and rocky shores. Flowers are funnel-shaped, rose-purple, about 5.1 cm in diameter, the leaves heartshaped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the wood rose (Merremia tuberosa), another kind of morning-glory, with deep yellow flowers and five-to seven-lobed leaves, grown ornamentally in Hawaiʻi for its dry, brown, rose-shaped fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(probably pili, to cling, + -kana, nominalizer.) 
   • relation, relationship, 
   • kin, family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• personal, 
   • private, 
   • subjective, 
   • worldly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikoʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hawkfish (Paracirrhites forsteri, Cirrhitops fasciatus, Amblycirrhites bimacula), 18 cm or less in length and light-pink in color, lit., coral clinging. Also Cirrhites pinnulatus and Oxycirrhites typus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikoʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of sugar cane named for the fish; stems yellow-green, with pale brown-red stripes when young, changing to bronze-yellow with darker brown-red stripes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikoʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stiff kind of pākalakala, a seaweed (Galaxaura lapidescens).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• giant, 
   • large strapping fellow, 
   • country person, one living in the country; countrified.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beloved husband.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilikua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fight in single combat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pililāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark green pandanus leaves with white bases, above the lāʻele, old leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilimai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of sugar cane, a yellow-green mutant of ʻakilolo; used in hana aloha, love sorcery, with the prayer for love to cling and hold fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilimai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilimai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilimeaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., close association [for] food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilimoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of one of the tapas in the game of pūhenehene.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilimua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gram. article, the part of speech: ke, ka, he, nā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilina moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bedsprings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilina ʻohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kinship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>association, relationship, union, connection, meeting, joining, adhering, fitting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>springs, as of a mattress, watch, car.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipili heʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin ends of octopus tentacles, as braided together when dried.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipili heʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>octopus or squid ink sac (ʻalaʻala) molded about a fishhook for bait.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipili ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>close to land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipiliʻula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a close blood relationship to one of high rank; this was said by persons entering the hale nauā, desirous of asserting their royal blood.  lit., red relationship [red was a sacred color].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipiliʻula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>also Desmodium uncinatum on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any sticky matter, adhesive; pasty, gluey, viscid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipuka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the period between midnight and dawn. lit., near appearance [of the sun].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipuka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of the tapa covers in the pūhenehene game, which were named for different parts of the night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alongside a fence or enclosure; hedge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilipōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piliwaiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gambling, betting, gambler; to bet, gamble. lit., to wager wealth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piliwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to believe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piliʻaikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• cramped, 
   • stiff, 
   • numb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piliʻaoʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mate, spouse, common-law mate with whom one lives openly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piliʻoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>billiards.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piliʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shore; interisland.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piliʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grammar, word or sentence structure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a narrow or precarious pass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻume, the game, so called because the wand touched (pili) the players.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a grass (Heteropogon contortus) known in many warm regions, formerly used for thatching houses in Hawaiʻi; sometimes added to the hula altar to Laka, for knowledge to pili or cling; thatch (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to refer, concern, relate, pertain, apply.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shingles, so called because they replace the pili grass of the roofs of the old houses (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wager, bet, stake; to bet, wager.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>border, edge of time units, especially of late night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uncolored sheets in a kapa kuʻina, sleeping tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lining of a quilt under the layer of cotton or wool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pili₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first stage of poi-pounding, with taro beginning to stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilo kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native tree or shrub (Platydesma spathulata), in the orange family; leaves large, thick, oblong, more or less pointed; flowers few, creamcolored; fruits small, dry, four-lobed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilo kea lau liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native shrub (Platydesma rostratum), with long, narrow leaves, clustered, axillary flowers, and beaked, four-lobed fruits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• swampy, foul odor, as of a swamp; 
   • halitosis; 
   • polluted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>some species of native shrubs, in the coffee family (Hedyotis [Kadual]), the leaves bad-smelling when crushed. see also kōī₅ (Coprosma kauensis) and au₁₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all Hawaiian species of Coprosma, a genus of shrubs and small trees belonging to the coffee family, with narrow to rounded leaves, tiny greenish flowers, and yellow, red, or black berries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as maiapilo,  a low, smooth shrub... (Capparis sandwichiana).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilo₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any kind, any whatsoever (used with ʻaʻohe).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shake, quiver, vibrate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pilupilu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overdressed, richly and elaborately overdressed, perhaps in a ridiculous way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beam, as for scales.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pimeneko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pimento (Capsicum annuum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to climb; a climb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinanaʻiea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn aside, as the head, or as the bow of a ship when struck by a large wave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinao ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of dragonfly. lit., red pinao.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dragonfly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flying gurnard, a fish (Dactylopterus orientalis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blurred, as eyes of a drunkard. similar to pōnalo₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad jump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinao₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perhaps a swing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to recoil, snap, as a rope.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine hoaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., crescent pin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine kaiapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>safety pin. lit., diaper pin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine kaulaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothespin. lit., hanging pin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine niho puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hog's tooth pin. Formerly also called pine hoaka. lit., pig tooth pin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine pā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fence picket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine umauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breast pin, brooch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pineki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peanut (Arachis hypogaea).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pineʻōmou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stickpin, brooch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pin, compass needle, peg, bolt, picket; stanchion to hold animal's head with yoke and pin; to pin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pine₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tame bullock tied to a newly captured wild cow or bull. When released it would lead the wild animal to a pen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pinika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vinegar; an intoxicating drink made of fermented molasses and water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to rub back and forth, saw; 
   • to pucker and unpucker the lips. 
   • fig., to go over and over in the mind, to mull over, think.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pioloolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feed such a concoction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piopio₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>call to chickens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• captive, prisoner, victim, prey; conquered, captured, made prisoner; 
   • game of tag; to play tag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pio₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to peep, chirp; 
   • to whistle with fingers on the mouth; 
   • to pipe on any flutelike instrument; 
   • peeping, peep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pio₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a measure of three iwilei (yards), especially of cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi Pākē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water buffalo, carabao. lit., Chinese beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi kaula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jerked beef (beef salted and dried in the sun, broiled before eaten). lit., rope beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi kauō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ox. lit., dragging beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calf. lit., child beef
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi kolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yearling cow or bull.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi kuapuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bison. lit., beef [with] humped back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bull. lit., male beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi kōʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broiled beef, steak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stew beef, beef stew.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi laho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bull.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi loke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roast beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi ohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young cow, heifer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi palai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beefsteak. lit., fried beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi poʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steer. lit., castrated beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi pulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bull. lit., bull beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cow. lit., female beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>milk cow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to draw away, shrink away, as an octopus tentacle on a fire; 
   • to crinkle up, 
   • contract: 
   • to turn aside so as not to meet, 
   • avoid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shrunk, crinkled; tight, cramped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenacious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drymaria (Drymaria cordata), a slender, weedy herb, with rounded leaves, tiny flowers, and tiny one-seeded dry fruits with sticky stems, which catch on passersby. It is a tropical shade-dwelling plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>promiscuous; promiscuous person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipipi kōlea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>periwinkle (Littorina pintado, L. scabra). lit., kōlea-bird shell, perhaps so called because ot its color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipipi kōlea ihiloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>periwinkle (Planaxis labiosus).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipipi ʻākōlea ihiloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mollusk (Planaxis labiosus). lit., long-necked gourd ʻākōlea shell, so called because of its shape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipipi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for small mollusks, including Theodoxus neglectus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipipi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• small and close together, as stars or pipipi shells; 
   • small, squinting, as eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipiʻauamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ox yoke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian pearl oyster (Pinctada radiata); in songs this is known as the iʻa hāmau leo o ʻEwa, ʻEwa's silent sea creature [it was believed that talking would cause a breeze to ripple the water and frighten the pipi].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feelers of an insect, as of an ant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of plant... (Psilotum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>body depression; eyeball.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower part of an adze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pipī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of pī₂, 
   • sputtering, 
   • smoldering, 
   • to snort, sniffle...; 
   • squinting; 
   • twinkling, as stars. 
   • fig., barely surviving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pewter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piuke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beauty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piula wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faucet, water tap, hydrant. lit., water metal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mule, donkey (Molokaʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a card game; the player must follow suit in discards, and if he cannot, he draws from a pack; the object is to play all of one's cards, and the player left with a card at the end is the piula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piula₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tired, exhausted, wornout. slang.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piula₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pewter, tin (Nah. 31.22) , corrugated iron as used for roofing; any metal suggesting pewter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piwa haka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beaver hat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piwa haʻihaʻi iwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dengue fever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piwa hoʻonāwaliwali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>typhoid fever. lit., weakening fever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piwa lenalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellow fever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piwa ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black plague.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piwa ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scarlet fever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piwa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beaver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of yam (Dioscorea pentaphylla), a climber with lobed leaves known throughout Pacific islands and in tropical Asia. It bears small aerial and subterranean, edible tubers. (HP 215), (Neal 230–1).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻi aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim chiefly blood, whether or not it exists.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻi kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to become light, as the day; to begin to gray, of hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻi pāwalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>octave. lit., eightfold ascent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻialiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro, one of the oldest varieties grown in Hawaiʻi; formerly known as one of the royal taros and desirable as an offering to the gods; today, an important wet-land poi taro. Leaves and corm are tinged with pink. This name may be qualified by the colors ʻeleʻele, keʻokeʻo, ʻulaʻula. (HP 28), (Whitney).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻihālāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻikoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim honors not rightfully due, to seek preferment, to aspire to the best or to more than is one's due; to claim to be of higher rank than one is.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻikuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of ancient prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻikū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to climb a steep slope; to climb, as a coconut palm by grasping the trunk with the hands and walking up with the feet; a steep climb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻikū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a medicine made of the sap of young kukui nuts, used as a gargle for sore throat and thrush; if swallowed it causes nausea and looseness of the bowels.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻikū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transpiration, water drops on leaves of plants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻilae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>haughty, proud. lit., forehead rising.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>climb, ascent, rise, incline, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻipiʻi kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise, of a strong sea. fig., to flare, as anger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻipiʻi ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>words of anger, emotion, controversy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻipiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bubbling forth, as water (Kanl. 8.7) ; to overflow, as charged water; effervesce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻipiʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>curly, curled, wavy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to experience personally, or appear, as heat, cold, emotion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• intercourse; 
   • to practice intercourse; 
   • to mount, as of male animals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>triangular piece inserted in a holokū skirt to add width, or inserted at the base of the legs of bell-bottom trousers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻi₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taros...
     piʻialiʻi a native variety of taro, one of the oldest varieties...
     piʻipiʻi aliʻi redup. of piʻialiʻi, a native variety of taro, 
     piʻihālāwai a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻoi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi name for hoi, the bitter yam (Dioscorea bulbifera).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻoi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiʻi name for edible fruit of the lama (Diospyros spp.) or perhaps kukui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻolepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>column of dust, cloud of dust. lit., dirt arch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻoloke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• alarmed, startled; alarm 
   • perturbed, vexed, disturbed, 
   • confused and excited, agitated; confusion, 
   • harassed; 
   • in noisy consternation;    
 (sometimes preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻoāʻea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tactless. Kaʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• arch, arc; 
   • bent, arched, curved; 
   • to arch, of a rainbow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>piʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marriage of full brother and sister of nīʻaupiʻo rank, presumably the highest possible rank. Their offspring had the rank of naha, which is less than piʻo but probably more than nīʻaupiʻo. Later piʻo included marriage with half-sibling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pohu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind associated with Kona, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pohākōʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻIkuwā, a month of storms; also said to be the name of a rain occurring in that month. lit., break forth in storms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Poinikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Phoenicia; Phoenician.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pokekona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Boston.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pokiulai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Fourth of July.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Poki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for supernatural dog after the time of Kamehameha I, said to have been taken from the name of Kamehameha's favorite dog, Boss (Eng.), which was deified and worshipped; name of a supernatural dog on Kauaʻi, said to have owned land at Lāwaʻi and Wahiawa (HM, p. 573). According to some, any supernatural animal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pokoliko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Puerto Rico; Puerto Rican.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pokomaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Potomac.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pokukala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Portugal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Polapola₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Tahiti, Borabora; Tahitian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Polapola₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name, paired with the star Melemele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Polenekia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Polynesia; Polynesian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Poliʻahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snow goddess of Mauna Kea. lit., Bosom goddess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Polo Ahi Lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, said to be associated with Mūlehu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pololena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Florence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pololika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Florida.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Polo₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star names:
     Polo Ahi Lani  name of a star, said to be associated with Mūlehu₂...
     Polohilani var. of Polo Ahi Lani, a star...
     Polo ʻUla  same as Polo Ahi Lani, a star...
     Polo Wehi Lani  same as Polo Ahi Lani, a star...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pope₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pope; papist, Catholic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Popoki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a lua fighting stroke, said to be used by women as well as men.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pouhānuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., low post.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Poʻokole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain said to occur in the month of Welo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Poʻolipilipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rain associated with Kalihi, Oʻahu, and Hilo, Hawaiʻi . lit., adzelike head, said to be so called because this heavy rain forced the people to spend so much time sleeping that their heads were sharpened as though by an adze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Poʻonui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a cold, continuous rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poahanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollyhock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dim, obscure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to revolve, spin, go around; to rotate, of hips in a hula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• deep, open, as a hole or sore; 
   • absorbent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poe pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bellboy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poeko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fluent, eloquent, clever and able in speaking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poepoe honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>globe of the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poepoehāwaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flat sphere; oval. lit., sea-urchin round.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poepoepīkoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oval; sphere. lit., core roundness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poepoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round, rounded, circular; compact, compressed; full, as the moon; sphere, globe; to gather together in a circle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poepoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a euphemism for penis in the phrase ʻoki poepoe, subincision, circumcision.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round; rounded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone poi pounder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poe₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poe₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buoy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to revive after fainting, recover consciousness; 
   • to recover from sickness; recovery.
   • relieved of worry; relief, rest,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open, as flower petals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohe haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the nasturtium (Tropaeolum majus) hybrids, a smooth, succulent, creeping herb, grown for its bright-colored flowers, the leaf blade round and attached near the center to the stem.  It grows wild at middle elevations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohe kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Asiatic pennywort (Centella asiatica), a small, weedy creeper, with round, scalloped leaves indented at the base, and white flowers and seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poheke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forced out, squeezed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poheue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nether region, place of torment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the marsh pennywort (Hydrocotyle verticillata), a small weed known in many parts of the world, the stem creeping, leaf blade round, scalloped, attached near its center to the stem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohihihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>obscure, entangled, mysterious, intricate, confused, confusing, bewildering, baffling, complex; mystery, obscurity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohihiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>evasive, obscure, difficult to grasp or comprehend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>matchbox. lit., fire container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho aho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container for fishing lines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho aniani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glass container or jar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho hoʻoluʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cup of coconut shell, gourd, or stone, containing dye for tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho kaha paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rock with a depression or dish in which salt was extracted from sea water. lit., salt-place receptacle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone lamp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho kuni ʻanāʻanā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small cup-shaped stone used for sorcery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho kāpalapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container for tapa dye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>palm or hollow of the hand; handful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho mea kanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flower pot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho paka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tobacco pouch, as a tin, coconut shell, or wooden container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho pauka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>powder container, compact, vanity case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>saltcellar, salt shaker, any salt container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho pāpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inside of crown of hat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho pōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone bowl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollow of the foot, instep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho ʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sinkhole of breadfruit trees, as on Niʻihau, where breadfruit trees were planted in holes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohokano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollow stone containing kukui oil used as a lamp (Malo 63); palm of the hand (stingy).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• underhanded, deceitful, dishonest; 
   • to come up from below, as an undercut blow;
   • to undermine, dig under, burrow beneath, 
   • filch, deal dishonestly; 
   • to reach up from under the crotch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>somewhat rotten, decayed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholelua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slow, as a vessel; unskilled, bungling, as in mechanical work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bruised, skinned, scraped; bruise, sore.
   • peeled, as cooked taro; 
   • slipped back, as the skin of the sex organ of a man or dog;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maui name for hōʻiʻo, a native fern, but larger and coarser on Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to sink, plunge out of sight, vanish; 
   • slip into easily, 
   • to miscarry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholopū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slip through; too large, as a hat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to billow out, as sails.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cavity of anus or vagina. lit., pit hollow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poholua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie to, as a ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohomōkoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mat design. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sinking in, caving in, hollowing, as cheeks of an aged person; settling; bend, as in a U-shaped fish-hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohopoho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>patched.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohopoho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kawakawa, a fish, so called because of black patch-like dots on its belly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohopoho₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stick out the buttocks, as in bending over to pick up something, or as a sign of contempt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohoʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land basin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• hollow or palm of the hand, hollow of the foot, depression, hollow; 
   • container, receptacle, pouch, as for tobacco; box, as for matches; 
   • hollow of a canoe, divided into three parts (mua, waena, hope). .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• mortar; 
   • to knead, as bread or poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• patch, as in clothes; 
   • a wooden patch inserted into a calabash, as to mend a break; 
   • to patch, mend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to belly out, puff out, as clothes on a line or a sail; 
   • to hollow or dub out, as a wooden container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a unit of measure equal to half a span (kīkoʻo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poho₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bundle of tapa pieces (moʻomoʻo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• calm, quiet; 
   • calmed, quieted, soothed; 
   • to calm down, become quiet. 
    cf. (For. 5:93), He pohu ko Kona, the pohu is of Kona.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohā kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rolling stone; thunder, peal of thunder, so called because thunder was believed caused by the gods hurling stones in the heavens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohā kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bursting forth of light, as dawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohāpohā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(cf. Marquesan pohapoha)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohāpohā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of passion flower, called running pop (Passiflora foetida), a tropical American weedy vine, the hairy leaves commonly three-lobed; the fruit, enclosed in lacy bracts, is round, red or yellow, popping when crushed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohāpohā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a non-edible, green seaweed (Dictyosphaeria cavernosa), small, round, hollow, that bursts with a pop when stepped on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to burst, crack, break forth, crash, pop, bang; 
   • bursting, cracking, as of explosives or of a whip; 
   • to ferment (of poi); 
   • breaking of bubbles.
   • flashing of light,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the cape gooseberry (Physalis peruviana), a South American perennial herb in the tomato family, growing wild. Flowers are yellow; round, orange, many-seeded fruits develop singly within the heart-shaped, papery, enlarged calyxes; they are edible raw and are also cooked for jam.  called paʻina on Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sink, settle, ebb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohō maʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a complete loss; to be such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• loss, damage; 
   • out of luck; 
   • vain [futile, without value or success].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pohō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bog, swamp, mire, slough; 
   • sunken, sinking; 
   • to settle, as earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poi maiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mashed ripe bananas and water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poi palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flour poi, made by stirring flour in hot water, eaten alone or mixed with taro poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poiʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breadfruit poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>potash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokakaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>revolving, gyrating, whirling, spinning; wheel, as on a pulley or cart, swivel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mushroom-shaped; head of the penis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go along, as wind-blown smoke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>potter; pottery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokepola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>phosphorus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokeʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>child, childhood; preadolescent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokeʻo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of ancient prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pole smeared with gum so that birds lighting on it will be caught.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portico.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boatswain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokipaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bind together, as the bones of a chief for preservation and honoring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokipoki kua paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., hard-backed pokipoki.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokipoki ʻau moana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of deep-water crab. lit., sea-swimming pokipoki.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokipoki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a parasitic isopod found clinging to the skin, gills, fins, mouths, and tails of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokipoki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a gray hard-shelled box crab (Calappa hepatica), not liked as food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokipoki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sow bug, pill bug (Isopoda).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a drink of either warm or cold water, with sugar and cream.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine, as stitches or mesh; small, dainty, close together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poki₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poki₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pokoke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kidney disease, urinary leakage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greasy cutworm, such as Agrotis ypsilon and Lycophotia margaritosa, the variegated cutworm; caterpillar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poko₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small division of a district, sometimes the personal lands of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polalauahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>haze, as during a volcanic eruption.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polapola₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>recovered from sickness; well, after sickness; to get well, convalesce; filling out, as after loss of weight; sprouting, as a bud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polapola₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flapping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pola₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• flap, as of a loincloth or sarong; 
   • tail of a kite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pola₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>platform or high seat between the canoes of a double canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pola₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blossoms and sheath of a banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poleke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have lost property by authority of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polepole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a child's game. The children put their clenched fists on top of each other; each child makes a wish or suggests a game to play, and sings a chant such as the following:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poli lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>center of the palm (poho) of the hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poli make</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dead breast. fig., see poli ʻawa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poli wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollow of the foot, instep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poli ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to nurse at the breast; a nursing breast. lit., eating breast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poli ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bitter breast. fig., one who has lost several mates in death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shining, gleaming; a gleam, flash of light.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tied tightly, not easily unfastened. fig., severe suffering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polikika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>political.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polikua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the dark, invisible beyond, as on beyond the horizon or in the upper stratum. lit., back bosom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resplendent, shiny black.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polinahe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft and gentle, as low music or a breeze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polinahe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slim-waisted and broad-shouldered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polipoli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a soft, porous stone as used for polishing or for octopus lure sinkers
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polipoli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rounded, of an adze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poliwaiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wet nurse. lit., milk bosom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poliʻahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to caress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bosom, breast; depression; (poetic) heart, arms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut husk attached to a fishing line.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polo wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water polo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polo-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an initial part of certain words referring to pandanus: polohīnano, polokā, polopeʻa, polopoloua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth, as of skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polohina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray, misty, smoky. fig., affectionate grief, pity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polohiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark, glistening black, as clouds or tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polohuku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, plump, swelling, bulging; rich, prosperous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polohuku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boat hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polohīnano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white male pandanus bloom (hīnano) with its stem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poloka kuea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>square pole, in surveying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polokake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slippery; wobbly; saturation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polokalama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>program, a term invented in the mid-1970s for the Hawaiian language radio program.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poloka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frog, toad, bufo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poloka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poloka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poloka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canna (Canna indica).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poloke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broken; broke, without funds (slang).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polokika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>political; politics,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polokā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ripe pandanus fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polokāwaʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polokāwaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pining, wasting sickness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polokē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fresh poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pololei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a land shell (Lamellaxis), frequently followed poetically by the epithet kani kua mauna, singing in the mountain ridges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pololei₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fresh poi. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pololei₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an adder's-tongue fern (Ophioglossum concinnum), a small native fern with single narrow-oblong blade, which supports one narrow spore-bearing spike about 2.5 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pololia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jellyfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pololo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>talkative; to talk without tact.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pololoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blundering, awkward; to go astray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pololū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polopeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>professor; professorial; to be a professor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polopeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thick stem of a pandanus fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polopolona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>musty odor; rancid, moldy odor, as of mildewed clothes; stuffy or stale smell of a room long closed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polopoloua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unripe, growing pandanus fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poloʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to summon, command to appear, invite; 
   • to proclaim publicly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, thick, plump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to poke, stab.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>special prayer offered to the spirits of the dead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of pololei₂, and also usually followed by the epithet kani kua mauna.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polo₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>polo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poluea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nausea, dizziness, seasickness; hangover; seasick, qualmish, dizzy. (cf. -ea.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dull, sleepy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poluluhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloudy, misty, shady.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>polupolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flabby, fat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poluā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nausea, retching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pomeikalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the pomegranate (Punica granatum), an ornamental and fruit-bearing shrub from Persia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pomekelane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pomegranate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pomelaike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pomegranate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pona kūpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>defense bonds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponanā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dry, arid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponanā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lame, stiff, sore, as legs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponapona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jointed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponawaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>circle of canoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• socket; 
   • eyeball, 
   • eye socket; 
   • joint of sugar-cane stalk, bamboo; 
   • hollow, as left after a sweet potato vine has been dug.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spotted, as the sea with various shades, variegated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pona₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poni liʻulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>early glimmer of dawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poni mākuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark purple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poni mōʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coronation; to crown a king or queen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poniaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poniard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponimōʻī liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the sweet William (Dianthus barbatus), a relative of the carnation, grown in gardens for its abundance of small, bright-colored flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poni₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to anoint, to daub;
   • ointment, oil, 
   • consecrate, crown, ordain, inaugurate; 
   • appoint
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poni₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, used as medicine. The term poni may be qualified by the colors ʻeleʻele or uliuli, kea, ʻulaʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poni₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poni₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>furniture, household goods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tools.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono kai lawaiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing rights.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>equal rights.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono koho pāloka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>right of suffrage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono kīwila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>civil rights.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono paʻa mau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fixtures.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono pilikino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>private rights.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water rights.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono ʻuhane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spiritual welfare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponokalapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>phonograph.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponokope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>copyright; to copyright; to copy in any way, not necessarily properly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponopono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neat, tidy, in order, arranged, cared for, attended to, administered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ponopono₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>comfortably well off, wealthy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>completely, properly, rightly, well, exactly, carefully, satisfactorily, much (an intensifier).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>property, resources, assets, fortune, belongings, equipment, household goods, furniture, gear of any kind, possessions, accessories, necessities.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>use, purpose, plan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hope.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pono₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>careless, informal, improper, any kind of. (preceding a stem).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>popela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poplar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pope₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poppy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>popohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round, shapely; neat and trim, as flowers; roundness, a round or clean-cut object.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>popoiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inside corner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>popoki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short, thick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>popoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arched, curved, warped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>popopo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rot, as of wood or cloth; decay, as of teeth; moth-eaten; worm offal; rust (Bible); rotten, decayed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>popoʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overwhelm...; redup of poʻi₂, top or crest of a breaking wave; to break, of waves...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poropoleme</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>problem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou alo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house wall posts, front row of posts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou hiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bent corner post, probably as supporting the ridgepole of a canoe house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou hoʻopaʻa lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hitching post.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou kihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corner post.  see illus. 1, illus. 2, illus. 3
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house wall posts, back row of posts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou kukuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gable post, wall post
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shaft of the lūheʻe, octopus lure, perhaps so called because one side has a stone attached, with a cowry on the other side. lit., double shaft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pouhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>post set in the middle of each end of the house, supporting the ridgepole. fig., support, mainstay, as of a family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pouhananuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short, stout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cleats supporting canoe seats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pouli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eclipse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pouomanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house post; post designating place of human sacrifice, said to be named for an ancient deity; center post. see illus. 1, illus. 2, illus. 3
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pouono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poupou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short and stocky, stout, thickset.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>post, pole, pillar, shaft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ridge, as of nose; lump
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mast of canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>machine gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>part of snood lashing on composite hook, as for bonitos; sometimes shaft of a hook is so called.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spool pins on a sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a canoe, broad for its length and wide and blunt at the ends, used for baggage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pou₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an internal hardening or tumor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>powehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dim, obscure, indistinct, vague, faint, unclear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scar; mark, as of tattooing or tapa design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weary, sore, lame, fatigued.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻapoʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a worm shell, a marine mollusk of the family Vermetidae.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻapoʻapōlā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gad about from house to house, especially of persons who eat constantly at houses of others.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻaʻaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the same as wauke, but the leaves commonly smaller, entire, and rounded. The leaves of wauke are commonly lobed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻaʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thump, as a drum with the base of the hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>castrated, emasculated; eunuch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sudden sound, as of flapping wings of a rooster, or of the thumping sound of the palms of the hands pressed together with fingers locked, or of hands striking the surface of the water; to make such sounds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dig under, undermine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻe kūʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>merchants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native purslane (Portulaca selerocarpa), with narrow, succulent leaves which have many hairs in their axes and white flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi kalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mulch for dry-land taro. lit., taro cover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high heavens (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night attack or ambuscade; to attack thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi wai holoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>washbasin, finger bowl. lit., water container for washing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi ʻuhane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soul snatching; to snatch or capture the souls of either the dead or of living persons, as by sorcery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overpowering, as love.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻimalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Portuguese man-of-war (Physalia).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻipoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of poʻi₁, to cover...; poʻi₄, to catch between cupped hands, to pounce, snatch...; poʻi₅, to mound up...;...  to conceal, as property that one does not want to share with others, or as a secret; to cover up, as the truth; to smother, as a fire; to hush the wailing of a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻipū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cover over entirely, as of clouds or engulfing waves; 
   • to attack, overwhelm; onslaught, attack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻipū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>afar, very high, of high rank, glorious, sacred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cover, lid; to cover (preceded by ke.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container, basin, as for liquids.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to catch between cupped hands, as a small bird or butterfly; to pounce, as a cat on a mouse; to snatch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mound up, hill up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo hina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray- or white-haired; ash-colored.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>symbol of a paragraph. lit., new heading.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo hoʻolewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a very taboo chief whose shadow might not fall on himself or on any other person; he was carried about at night. lit., carried head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo huaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>splitting headache.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo huku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>top point of a hill, ridge; sharp tips of ridges of a file or rasp. lit., protruding head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo hulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief featherworker for a chief, a hereditary office.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo huna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hidden, mysterious, invisible, as the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>human head, skull.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo kepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hair cut in an extraordinary manner, as of one in mourning in the old days, with only part of the hair cut. lit., sideways head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white-haired; platinum blonde.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo kihikihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cocked, as a hat; angular, as a head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo koʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adze-headed, a term of ridicule for one with a sharp or projecting forehead; also an insulting term for evil sorcerers, so-called because they were "frequently" beheaded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo kuakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray-haired. lit., bleached head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>school principal. lit., teacher head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leaf base; butt end of a leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>child sired by other than the husband, but accepted by both husband and sire; this acceptance increased the number of relatives of the child who gave their loyalty to him as kinsmen; it thus fostered the prestige of children of chiefs; translated "adulterous" in the 1843 Bible (Mar. 8.38) , but changed in later editions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo luluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., tired head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo maunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bait remainder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo niuniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizzy head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo noʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a thinker, a thoughtful head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hangover, worried head, worry; to be a "headache" or source of trouble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hardheaded, stubborn, obstinate, unreasonable, set in one's ways.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo pepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flathead, a name for lesser gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo puʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bulging head; hilltop. fig., sullen, unsocial person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water source or head, dam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo ʻōpae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shrimp head, an opprobrious term because the shrimp's excretory organs are said to be in its head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻohala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry on the virtues, arts, and skills of the family. lit., passing on the head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻohiwi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shoulder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻohiwi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wing of the body (manu) of a kite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻohū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wound, swelling, as on the head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻohū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prolonged resonance, as of a gong or as heard after striking a certain kind of stone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokanaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of watermelon. lit., human head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokanaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kohala name for pansy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokaʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bent over, as in carrying a heavy load.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foremost, best, superior, prime, outstanding, greatest, supreme, utmost, superlative; champion; to excel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high beads, a name for the great gods, Kāne, Kana, and Lono.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mask, jack-o'-lantern. lit., image head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>envied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻokoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sorcerer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻoleka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>postage stamp. lit., letter head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻoleka kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>war-savings stamp. lit., war stamp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻolima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a half note (music). lit., arm note.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻolā nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native species of koʻokoʻolau (Bidens cosmoides), on Kauaʻi only, with yellow flowers 5 cm across.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻolānui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young stage of dragonfly, between the larval stage (lohelohe) and adulthood (pinao); beggarticks. lit., great sun head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻolā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stevedore. lit., sun head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻolā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the few Hawaiian varieties of small native trees (Claoxylon sandwicense), in the euphorbia family, with soft wood, large oblong, toothed leaves, small clustered flowers, the fruit a three-parted capsule.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻomahiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crest, as of a bird. lit., helmet head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻomana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an eighth note (music). lit., branching note, named for the stem mark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻomanakolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a thirty-second note (music). lit., triple branching note.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻomanalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sixteenth note (music). lit., doubly branching note.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻomanaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>topic, title, theme, heading, headline; subtitle, as of law. lit., thought heading.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻomuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cut off, severed, shortened.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻonui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>top-heavy, as a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopalaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of white shell (no data). lit., ivory head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopaoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for highest tip of the canoe endpiece.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hawkfish (Cirrhites pinnulatus), about 10 to 22cm long with large scales on body and small scales on face, colored in blotches of blue, brown, and red with white vertical bars; eaten raw, broiled, or salted and dried. lit., hard head. Also ʻoʻopu kai, ʻoʻopu poʻopaʻa, pilikoʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopoʻohina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Both names on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopoʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sunken, as eyes of a sick person; 
   • indented, deep (as a bay penetrating the coastline); 
   • nook, cranny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopuaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head pupil in a hula school. lit., pig head, so named because the head pupil provided a pig or pig-head offering. cf. (UL 29).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopuaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>image of a pig, carved of wood such as kukui, placed on the stone heap marking the boundary of an ahupuaʻa land division.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopuaʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopāpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a drooping crest, as of some birds. lit., hat head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻopūʻali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any depression in the head, as a sunken temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻouli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honeycreeper (Melamprosops phaeosoma), discovered in 1973 by Tonnie Casey and James Jacobi, upper Hāna rainforest, Maui, named by Kawena Pukuʻi. lit., black head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wrasse (Cheilinus rhodochrous). Varieties are qualified by the colors kea and ʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻoʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quarter note (music). lit., black full note.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻoʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>illegitimate. lit., no head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻoʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>title, as of an article; text, as of a sermon. lit., speech heading.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a whole note (music).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>poʻo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• depression, cavity; 
   • to dip, scoop, hollow out, dub, erode, dig; 
   • to splash, as water by scooping the base of the palm; 
   • to make a squeaky sound by placing one hand against the armpit of the opposite arm, and pressing that arm against the hand; 
   • to make a noise by snapping the lips with the fingers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puaahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., fire flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puahiohio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind, Nuʻuanu, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puakaiāulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name. probably same as Kaiāulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puakauahihaehaekamanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the smoke blows, the birds rage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puakaʻilima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Howland Island, a name used by Hawaiian guano diggers there in about 1856. lit., the ʻilima flower. see song, (Pukui-Korn 80–2).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puanakau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the star Rigel, tutelary star of West Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puanane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puaʻakāhuluhulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the pig strikes body hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pua₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Molokaʻi sorcery goddess... A Molokai sorcery goddess of possession with human and mudhen (ʻalae) forms. It was believed that if an ʻalae flew over a house crying at night, trouble would follow. lit., rising [as smoke] .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puepelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pueblo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puhi-ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a legendary eel; according to one authority, a Conger cinereus eel. lit., red eel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pukikī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tight-waisted dress, supposedly worn once by Portuguese.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pulelehua Kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Greater Magellanic Cloud. lit., white butterfly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pulelehua Uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Lesser Magellanic Cloud. lit., dark butterfly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pulema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Burma.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pulo Eʻe Moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bureau of Emigration. lit., bureau for boarding ships.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pulo Hoʻolaha lʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bureau of Fisheries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pulukalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bulgaria, Bulgarian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pulukelina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Brooklyn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pupue₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star in the constellation Kaulua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Pupūhale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain famous at Hāmākua, Hawaiʻi. lit., [rain] remaining [near] house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻukapele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as Puʻupele, the name of a wind at Mānā, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻukaʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind, Mt. Kaʻala, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻukōlea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Kapaʻau, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻulena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a famous cold wind at Kīlauea, Hawaiʻi and at Puna.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻunahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Waipā, Kauaʻi.  lit., forested hill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻuokona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Kuliʻouʻou, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻupā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻuwai Laʻahia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sacred Heart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Puʻuwepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pu kihi lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double-barreled gun
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua Pākē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a genus (Chrysanthemum) in the daisy family, including many species of ornamental annual and perennial herbs, with small to large flower heads, which are white to red, yellow, or purple. Most species are from the Eastern Hemisphere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua Pākē pihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dwarf pua Pākē, a genus (Chrysanthemum) in the daisy family...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua aheahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow gently; light, as work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glow like fire. For figurative use see koʻikoʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>descendant of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow spray or dust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright yellow base of a pandanus (hala) key that may be used for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua hau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blossoms of hau, a tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua hau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellow, as a malo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua hilahila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica var. unijuga), a low, spreading American plant, with round pink flower heads. The leaves, compound, with many small leaflets, droop and close when touched.  lit., bashful flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua hipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lamb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua hōkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tropical American herb (Laurentia [Isotoma] [Hippobroma] longiflora), 30 to 60 cm high, with few or no branches, with long, narrow, lobed leaves, and starlike flowers with 7.5 cm long tube. The plant is related to the lobelias. It is poisonous, especially to stock. lit., star flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua hōkū hihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the waxflower (Hoya bicarinata), an ornamental vine from Samoa, Tonga, and Fiji, in the milkweed family. Leaves are thick, broad-oval, paired, at their bases bearing short clusters of waxy, fragrant, white and pink, star-shaped flowers used for leis. lit., entangled star flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua iʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish spawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kalaunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the crown flower (Calotropis gigantea), a large shrub, native from India to the East Indies, belonging to the milkweed family. The crown-shaped flowers, white or lavender, are commonly used for leis, and the plants for hedges in dry areas.  called liliʻu on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the beach or prickly poppy (Argemone glauca), a Hawaiian species closely related to a southern United States species, a gray, prickly plant with stiff, lobed, toothed leaves and fragile, white-petaled flowers. Formerly, Hawaiians used the yellow juice to relieve pain. lit., thorny flower. also kala, naule, pōkalakala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native prickly lobelia (Cyanea solenocalyx), a shrub with large ovate or oblong, prickly leaves and hairy, purple flowers, found in gulches of Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the spear thistle (Cirsium vulgare), a coarse, prickly European weed, 60 to 150 cm high, with large, spiny, lobed leaves, and dark-purple, spiny flower heads about 5 cm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kaʻaona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dart made of the stem of sugar-cane tassel smoked reddish-brown (kaʻaona).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kepalō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bougainvillea. lit., devil flower [so-called because of thorns]. Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blossoms of kukui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kāhala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small kāhala, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flower of the ti.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kīkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cigar flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua kō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stem and tassel of sugar cane (the stem was used in making hats).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua laha ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a choice and rare flower. fig., a beloved person. lit., flower not widespread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua lahilahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>single flowering. lit., thin flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>descendant of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flowers for leis; cherished blossom or child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua lēʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flower that attracts many (lēʻī), as a lehua that attracts birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua maka nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., large-eyed flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua makahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>annual flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of vine (Stephanotis floribunda), in the milkweed family, from Madagascar. It has oval, leathery, paired leaves and clustered, fragrant, white, tubular flowers, which are sometimes worn by brides in Hawaiʻi. lit., wedding flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua niu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua niu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>color of the coconut flower; ivory-colored.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua nānā honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tree (Solanum auriculatum syn. S. carterianum) native to Madagascar and tropical Asia, related to the tomato, having large, downy, oblong leaves, and blue flowers clustered at branch tips. lit., flower looking [at] earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua nānā lā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the common sunflower (Helianthus annuus), a coarse annual herb, 1 to 4.5 m high, from the western United States. It is a member of the daisy family and has flower heads from 8 to 35 cm across, the yellow ray florets surrounding a brown-purple center. lit., flower looking [at] sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua pepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the everlasting or straw flower. lit., paper flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua pepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bougainvillea (Bougainwillea spectabilis). Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua pihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all kinds of zinnias, especially one (Zinnia elegans), a Mexican annual grown ornamentally for the flowers. The flower heads are 5 to 13 cm across, single and daisy-like, or double and somewhat round, and of various colors. In Hawaiʻi is also found a wild species (Z. pauciflora), from Mexico and South America, with 2.5 cm-wide, single flower heads, the central florets yellow, the rays yellow, red, or purple.  lit., button flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua pilipili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Spanish clover (Desmodium uncinatum), a South American herb, long established in Hawaiʻi. It is good fodder. The plant is 30 to 90 cm high, each leaf having three ovate leaflets with a light area along the midrib. Flowers are small, pink or whitish, pea-shaped. Pods are narrow, flattened, chainlike, 2.5 to 5 cm long, clinging to clothing and animals.  also kīkānia pipili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piglet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua pupupu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double flowering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua āholehole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young āholehole (young stage of the āhole, Hawaiian flagtail)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ʻanuhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., caterpillar flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ʻehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shine brightly, as reddish flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ʻena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glow brightly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ʻilima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ʻilima flower; eaten as a mild cathartic, especially by children.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻāwela, a flowerless (pua ʻole) sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pua ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>natal grass (Rhynchelytrum repens), grown for forage; highly ornamental.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaaneane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extremity of life, extreme old age.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to expire, breathe one's last.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design in tapa and patchwork quilts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a medium-sized bowl, as used for serving poi, named for a supposed resemblance to a pandanus key (pua hala).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahekili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of the native loosestrifes (Lysimachia hillebrandii). lit., thunder flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spry, quick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hazy, gray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to come and go swiftly, as a puff or gust of wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahiohio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whirlwind, gust. fig., worthless talk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puahuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a term of contempt; perhaps literally rising octopus head; said also to refer to erections not followed by satisfaction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaināwele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, weblike, weak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaiohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small Kauaʻi thrush (Phaeornis palmeri).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red of tapa or malo dyed with noni juice (Malo 49); a red tapa used in kuni ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to assume the appearance of kala seaweed, said of octopus in the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of crab.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakauhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakawaihae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakawaihae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pale-colored, especially a tint between white and pink, as sunset clouds; the color of a buckskin horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread, as a ship's sails or as fog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakelekino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a spiny climbing vine (Caesalpinia sepiaria) from India, first grown in Kaʻū, Hawaiʻi, by Father Celestino.  lit., Celestino flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, skinny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take, as without permission.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakoali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tapa colored by beating in sandalwood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a young eel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red seaweed (Liagora decussata), somewhat calcified but flexible, branched; not edible; related to pāpaʻakea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puakōʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red, as lehua blooms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualalea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clear, bright.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry on the hip, as a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the sow thistle (Sonchus oleraceus), a weedy herb in the daisy family, from Europe. It is 30 cm tall or more, the leaves narrow, lobed, toothed, the flower heads clustered, yellow, about 3 cm in diameter. The light seeds are tipped with hairy tufts. The plant is sometimes fed to pigs and the leaves eaten by people during famine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weed (Emilia fosbergii, misidentified as E. javanica). Niʻihau. cf. (Neal 854–5).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellow color; to appear yellow, as said of dawn or muddy water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy; to loll about.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsettled, unfixed, always on the move; upset stomach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of tapa used for loincloths and sarongs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pualu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of surgeonfish (Acanthurus xanthopterus and A. mata), up to 15 and 20 cm in length and brown or dull-gray in color. It resembles the palani in tough skin and strong smell but may be distinguished from the latter by a blue line across the soft part of the fin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caret sign of omission.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puanaiea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, sickly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puanaʻī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>front of the neck and throat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pronunciation, utterance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to surround, encompass, crowd.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puanea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mournful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puanihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young taro, taro tops.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaniki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bind tightly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaniki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small wooden bowl, as for an individual serving of poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tapa dyed with coconut, probably oil; a tapa dye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaokalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>false daisy (Eclipta alba).  lit., flower of the chief [or heaven]. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaokama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a gourd (Sicyos niihauensis), first collected and identified by H. St. John. cf. kūpala and (Neal 808).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>comb or crest of a bird, as of a chicken. lit., head issue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapua moa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall feathers of a chicken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapuamoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long-tailed dinner coat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapuamoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of adder's-tongue fern (Ophioglossum pendulum), found in Polynesia westward into Madagascar, commonly growing on trees. It has ribbon-like fronds, erect or bent and hanging, 60 cm long or less, some bearing short, narrow, spore-filled spikes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapuanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapuaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pour continuously or often.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tail feathers, as of a cock; 
   • rump, as of a chicken; 
   • streamer; 
   • coattails; 
   • this word is used as a means of avoiding answering questions:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spike in the back of sphinx moths.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puapua₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pua awa, young awa, fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa hame</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ham.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa heʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blood-stained pig, hence a sacrificed pig, also said of human sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa hinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greasy pig. fig., human sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa hiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a solid-black pig, much desired for sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa holo honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Tahitian name for horse, perhaps used at one time in Hawaiʻi. lit., pig runs [on the] ground.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa hulu ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hairless pig, a figurative name for taro leaves, since they might sometimes replace pig as sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>certain fish (as āhole, ʻamaʻama, ʻanae, humuhumunukunukuāpuaʻa, kūmū, pualu) used as substitute for pig offering. lit., sea pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hog offered as sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa kumulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sow, pig who has borne young.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa laho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boar; term of reproach for a lecherous male, named for the pig demigod, Kamapuaʻa. lit., scrotum hog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for plants that might replace pig in some sacrifices, a favorite being young taro leaves. Others were ʻamaʻu, hāpuʻu, kūkaepuaʻa, kukui, olomea, and ʻuhaloa. They were considered the plant forms of the pig demigod, Kamapuaʻa. lit., leaf pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa māiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa nui huelo huluhulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horse (old name, Lānaʻi). lit., big animal hairy tail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa ohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a young female pig that has not borne young.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa olomea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a striped pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa olomea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poetic name for the olomea, a tree. Kamapuaʻa took this form when pursued by Pele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>early name for cattle when brought to the islands by Vancouver. lit., beef (Eng.) pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa pūkoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spotted pig. lit., coral head pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa wāwae loloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>human sacrifice...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa ūkō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pig offering at the death of a chief as a plea to the ʻaumākua gods to receive the spirit of the departed. lit., fulfillment pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>puaʻa ʻehuʻehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red pig, a poetic name for ʻāmaʻumaʻu, ferns. The demigod Kamapuaʻa took this form when he ran from Pele to the forest of ʻamaʻu ferns and turned into a fern himself.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>