<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-a</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(perhaps a var. of ani.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-aʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nonproductive transitive suffix. see huaʻi, luaʻi, lumaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pejorative suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nominalizing suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare transitivizer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>how many? How much? (Follows ʻa-, ʻe-, or pā-.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hoʻohiki₂. to vow, swear, take an oath, promise; to administer an oath; vow, oath, promise, pledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to peel, pry off.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>female, feminine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hune</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cf. nē hoʻohune, to wheedle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-hūnōai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>father- or mother-in-law, usually after makua and followed by kāne or wahine for specific designation of sex. These terms apply also to uncle and aunt by marriage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-i</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitivizer suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-iele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pejorative suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ihoiho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cf. hoʻopiʻipiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swollen, bloated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nominalizer noted in pale, to ward off, and palekana, safety; pili, to cling, and pilikana, relative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kanaoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hoʻokanahē
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perhaps a transitivizer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hesitation, fear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitivizer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. similar to ʻia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indicator of plurality in the plural pronouns and possessives only (kākou, mākou, ʻoukou, lākou).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intensifying suffix. see:
   auwalakī₁,₂,  entangled, snarled...  destitute (wala to fall backwards...)
   halakī. to go off course, miss the way. (hala to pass by, miss...)
   hilikī, to hit carelessly, at random (hili₃ to whip, smite, thrash, switch, bat...)
   kūpakakī, intensive of kūpaka, kick, thrash... 
   makakī, to look at with hatred. (maka eye, face...)
   mōkākī, scattered, littered, mess... (moka offal, waste matter, refuse, filth...)
   pakakī₁. to talk irrationally, loudly, or contentiously... (paka₂ to criticize constructively, to look for flaws...)
   pūkalakī, rough, boisterous, as wind; ruffled, mussed... (pukakala rough, coarse... )
   walawalakī, to fall back; to plummet to the ground... (wala to fall backwards...)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-kīkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>back and forth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-lana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nominalizing suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-laʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitivizer, as in kaulaʻi, kulaʻi, lualaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-lele kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flying tī
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-lia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. suffix corresponding to ʻia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-lua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dual number in pronouns and possessives, as ʻolua, kāua, māua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-mia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-mā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>see koʻi hoʻomā, chisel...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-naʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare transitivizer. cf. hili, to wander, and hilinaʻi, to believe; pī, to sprinkle, and pīnaʻi, to fill a crack;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-na₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common nominalizing suffix, sometimes with shortening of a long vowel in the base.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-na₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rare pas/imp.; suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-na₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>his, her (in poss. kāna, kona).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-nia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-noʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>see
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-piʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>complain, accuse, claim...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-poni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suddenly, without warning, as death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-puʻukie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ensnare, entrap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-u</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second person singular poss. suffix in kāu and kou, your.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indicator of the dual number in first and third persons of pronouns and poss. only (kāua, māua, lāua).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-walu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many. (Eight being a sacred number may have led to this extension of the meaning.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-wā hoʻowā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to retch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ā-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>simulative ligature in the sequence 'verb + noun' compounds; particle for forming verb compounds; like, similar to. 
usu. verb + ā + noun:
     ʻaiāmanō eat like a shark, have a prodigious appetite
     ʻaiāpuaʻa eat like a pig
     hanuāpuaʻa breathe like a pig, gasp for breath
     heleāiʻa (= holoāiʻa) swim like a fish
     heleāwai  flow like water
     hikiāloa long-range, long-term
     holoāiʻa swim like a fish
     huliāmahi turn like a strong (cock); cooperation, strength
     kaheāwai flowing like water
     kaʻiālupe lit. to lead like a kite (support a person between two others)
     kūākanaka turn into a man, look like a man
     kūākiʻi stand with hands on hips... like a statue...
     kūāmaʻi very sick
     mokuāhana dividing into factions
     mokuāhua grief, pity, disappointment
     mokuāwai burst as floodwaters, rush as a crowd
     paiālewa tossed here and there (lit., lift into space)
     paʻiāumi beat one's chest (as in lamentation)
     pukaāmaka to appear to the eyes (seal a relationship of two families by marriage)
    ʻumiāpuaʻa strangled like pigs
also verb + ā + verb:
     uhaiāholo chase like running
     uluāhewa mania, delusion; grow wild and lush
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pejorative suffix, often written wā after o or u. see ʻaiā, haiā, hainā, huā (huwā), kauā (kauwā), lonoā, (lonowā), mākoeā, naʻauʻauā (naʻauʻauwā), poluā (poluwā)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>personal article occurring only after the preposition i, written ia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitivizer suffix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first person singular poss. suffix in kaʻu, koʻu, and kuʻu, mine, my.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ʻulaʻula lehelehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mea ʻulaʻula lehelehe lipstick...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>-ʻulaʻula papālina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mea ʻulaʻula papālina rouge...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>a kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>by the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise up; to raise the head; to come up from under water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aeae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a prolonged sound, 
   • wail; 
   • to prolong, 
   • stretch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aeae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>andante.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aeāea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small green fish resembling the hīnālea, used as pani (food or drink taken to finish a medical treatment) for certain diseases of children of the ʻea type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aeʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stilts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aeʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian stilt bird (Himantopus mexicanus knudseni), an endemic subspecies of stilt, formerly common on the main Hawaiian Islands, endangered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ahiahi Kalikimaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Christmas Eve, Christmas night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ahiahi Makahiki Hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>New Year's Eve.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Aholehia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahaaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pant, to breathe hard with heat, as a dog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahahana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>syllables repeated in chants, usually at ends of verses, similar to ēhē; also ahana and ahana kōkō lele, both meaningless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahahana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a taunting singsong teasing phrase, used especially by children, meaning "Oh! Oh! Aha! Shame on you! You are going to catch it!"; as a verb, to tease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for aha ʻia ana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breeze; to blow or breathe gently. waft; softly blowing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aheahe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, gentle in sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aheahe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahi koli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass fire from one candlenut to the next on a chain (koli) or candlenut torch. lit., to fire the torch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahi lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire fountain, firebrands thrown over cliffs at Kamaile, Kauaʻi. see ahi and chant, Kauahae.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahi pōkaʻuwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pinwheel (fireworks).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahi ʻai honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>volcano, volcanic fire. lit., fire destroying land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahikao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fireworks (perhaps from Eng. scow [kao], as fireworks were first displayed from ships of explorers).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahikao lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skyrocket, rocket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahikoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>match. lit., scratching fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahimakani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gasoline. lit., wind fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, indolent; to shirk work, loiter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahipele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>match.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aho loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long line, as with several hooks for deep-sea fishing or for sounding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aho pueo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lashing on the pueo main purlin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aho ʻōwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lashing fastening kaupaku roof to kua ʻiole, upper ridgepole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aholoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., long-breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>better, well, well-being, fortunate, improved; to need (aho₃ + -na).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahonui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• patience; patient, 
   • enduring, 
   • long suffering; 
   • to tolerate. 
   • lit., great breath.    
see ex., lawe₂, makua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>line, cord, lashing, fishing line, thong, kite string.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breath; to breathe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aho₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>it is better or preferable (used after e, sometimes in comparisons).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• heap, pile, collection, mound, mass; 
   • altar, shrine, cairn; 
   • a traplike stone enclosure made by fishermen for fish to enter; 
   • laid, as the earth oven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahu lāʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti-leaf raincoat or cape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahu waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>storehouse, heap of goods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahu ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overeat, waste food, squander.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahu ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kava dregs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahuahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>healthy, vigorous; strength and vigor, as of animal or plant; to grow rapidly, thrive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make two thicknesses by folding; to double up, fold, as paper or tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stone to death; slaughter by burying the victim under a pile of stones. Hākau, half brother of ʻUmi, was killed in this fashion (FS 141), and this method was used unsuccessfully against the hero Kawelo (FS 107).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• pestilence, epidemic, 
   • heaped up, as dead bodies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahuliʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overheated, as over stones; white-hot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overdone, overcooked; overcultivated, as soil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pile, heap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahunāliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a land division.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahup</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation for ahupuaʻa₁, land division usually extending from the uplands to the sea...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahupuaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land division usually extending from the uplands to the sea, so called because the boundary was marked by a heap (ahu) of stones surmounted by an image of a pig (puaʻa), or because a pig or other tribute was laid on the altar as tax to the chief. The landlord or owner of an ahupuaʻa might be a konohiki.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahupuaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the altar on which the pig was laid as payment to the chief for use of the ahupuaʻaland.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ahuwale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exposed, conspicuous, prominent, obvious, in plain view; heaped up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ai hea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Where? also: aia i hea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ai laila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>there, to be there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ai lalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>down there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ai loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>away off in the distance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ai luna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>up there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia hoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>behold! see there! look! suddenly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia i laila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>there, to be there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia i lalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>down there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia i luna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>up there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia kā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>There now! So it's there after all!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia lā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>There! I told you so! There it is!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia naʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>but, furthermore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>depending on, only if, only when, whatever, whenever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aihuawaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vagabond; to wander, roam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aikahaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cf. (FS 251).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aikāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>friend; friendly; to become a friend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sexual intercourse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aiāhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻaiā, ungodly; godless;  irreligious, unbelieving, careless of observance of taboos; wicked, wickedness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Here! Here it is!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coition; to have sexual relations, cohabit (frequently pronounced ei).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ak</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation of ʻākau, north.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Akeomilu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the liver of Milu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Akua kahikolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Holy Trinity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Akua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>God (Christian).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Akua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the 14th night of the full moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aka kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>negative of a photograph.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aka-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carefully, slowly. cf:
         akaʻai to eat slowly, carefully  (ʻai, to eat...)
         akahai modest, gentle...
         akahana to work carefully or slowly (hana, to work...)
         akahao to pick up carefully, as food (hao, to pick up...)
         akahele slow or moderate, cautious... (hele, to go...)
         akahoe to paddle carefully, silently (hoe, to paddle...)
         akaholo to sail or run cautiously (holo, to sail, run...)
         akakuʻu lessened, diminished... (kuʻu, to diminish, as stream water...)
         akalewa to sway the hips daintily... (lewa, to float, swing...)
         akaluli to move slowly, carefully (luli, to shake, sway...)
         akanahe careful, gentle in behavior and speech (nahe, soft, sweet...)
         akanoho to sit quietly, live cautiously (noho, to sit, reside...)
         akaʻōlelo to speak cautiously, deliberately, in moderation (ʻōlelo, to speak...)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaaka ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>not clear, vague, indistinct.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaakalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>afterglow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clear, luminous, transparent, visible, manifest, plain, intelligible; thin, as cloth; shining, bright, distinct.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a white and very thin tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a downy, thorny branching plant (Solanum aculeatissimum), 30 to 90 cm high, from tropical America. It bears round scarlet fruits 2.6 em in diameter, which are strung for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akahai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>modest, gentle, unassuming, unpretentious, unobtrusive, docile, decorous, meek, suave; meekness, modesty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to work carefully or slowly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pick up carefully, as food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akahiʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>base of caudal fin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akahoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to paddle carefully, silently.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sail or run cautiously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akakole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>destitution, poverty; poor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akakuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lessened, diminished, mitigated; to cease, abate, grow calm, stop, as wind, surf, rain, anger, grief, pain; settled, calmed, quieted, appeased.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akakū ānuenue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the phenomenon known as the Specter of the Brocken, seen at Haleakalā Crater. lit., rainbow apparition.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akakū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• vision, trance; to see a vision.
   • reflection, as in a mirror; 
   • hallucination;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the ghost or spirit of a living person seen by others, a sign of calamity. lit., many shadows.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akalei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>string of multicolored glass beads. lit., bead reflections.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sway the hips daintily, deliberately, and gracefully.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaluli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move slowly, carefully.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akanahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>careful, gentle in behavior and speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akanoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sit quietly, live cautiously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stingy, miserly, hard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akauahelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go here and there, vagabond; vagabond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat slowly, carefully, cf. Easter ʻaka kai, eat more.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaʻakaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic begonia (Hillebrandia sandwicensis), a succulent herb with oblique, rounded lobed leaves 10 to 20 cm in diameter and with sprays of small pink or white flowers, found only in shaded, damp ravines. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tall endemic climber (Smilax sandwicensis) with tendrils and shiny, leathery, heart-shaped leaves; used for tying rafters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaʻaʻamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of fine white tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red sunset, looked upon as a sign that rain will clear. lit., red shadow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akaʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak cautiously, deliberately, in moderation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shadow. cf. hoaka₄.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• reflection, 
   • image, likeness (Nah. 12.8) ; 
   • faint glimmer preceding the rising of the moon; to appear, of moonlight. 
   • essence of an offering rather than the flesh; 
Many words compounded with aka express clarity, brightness, related to this meaning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>embryo at the moment of conception.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>newly hatched fish in the stage in which its body is still transparent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aka₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>knuckles, as of hands or ankles; joints of the backbone; node and stalk of kava; kava slip for planting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ake maka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edible raw liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akeakamai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lover of wisdom, seeker after knowledge, philosopher, scientist, scholar; philosophy, science; scientific. lit., to desire wisdom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akeake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quick, ready, as to do a kindly, deed, helpful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akeloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spleen. lit., long liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akemakani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lung. lit., wind liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akemāmā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lung. lit., light liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to boast, brag, admire, praise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akenīʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spleen. lit., coconut-midrib liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akepahaola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akepau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tuberculosis, consumption. lit., finished liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akepaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>liver (more specific than ake). lit., firm liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akepāhola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ake₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>liver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ake₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to desire, wish, be eager, yearn [the emotions and intelligence were thought to be centered within the body].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ako</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatching; to thatch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aku nei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a while ago, last.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a god to whom one appealed with offerings for help, as in fishing, farming, or killing an enemy. lit.. work god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua hoʻounauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>god sent on errands of destruction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua hulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feather image.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua hānai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirits, as of a recently dead kinsman, who were fed (hānai) offerings (such as food) and sent out to destroy an enemy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua hānai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the kauila, nīoi₂, and ʻohe "poison" woods of Molokaʻi, which were kept by sorcerers in their houses, wrapped in tapa, and to which food offerings were made daily; scraps of these woods were used as poison, and poison itself was sometimes called akua hānai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua kahukahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a god to whom offerings and sacrifices were made.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>image representing a god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua kumu haka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to akua hānai₁,spirits sent out to destroy an enemy...; akua hānai₂,  scraps of woods used as poison...;  sent out in the shape of fireballs to kill, or inserted in a victim's food, water, or tobacco.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua kāʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick image (general name); image wrapped in tapa; image consisting of a carved staff, with a tuft of feathers at the top, bound to its bearer by a sash (kāʻai₁) (Malo 80) and carried into battle; staff with a carved figure at the head, used in ceremonies to procure offspring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua lapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ghost, specter, apparition, evil spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flying god, usually a poison god sent to destroy, sometimes in the form of fireballs (pōpō ahi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tall image, especially an image of Lono carried on a circuit of the island during the makahiki, harvest festival; it was called loa, long, because of its "long" travels. The image consisted of a staff about two fathoms long. Pieces of pala fern, feather leis, and skins of the kaʻupu bird were fastened to a crosspiece tied near the top of the staff, in the center of which was a tiny carved head. A long and white tapa banner was attached to the crosspiece. ((Malo 143–5), but see (Malo text, chapter 36, sections 22–4)) Tribute was collected. also Lono Makua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua malihini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foreign god, epithet often applied to Pele because she had come from a foreign land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a spirit that takes possession of people and speaks through them as a medium.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua pahulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the god of nightmares; a god who carried persons to distant places in their sleep, especially if they had eaten certain fish, as the weke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua panauea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>last and slow-moving image in a procession during kauila nui ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua poko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to akua loa (a tall image, especially an image of Lono carried on a circuit of the island during the makahiki), except that it was taken to a poko₃ (a small division of a district, sometimes the personal lands of a chief)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua pāʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>image representing the god of sports that accompanied the akua loa on its circuit, to preside at the sport festivals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua ulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a god that inspires or possesses people.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goddess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua ʻai hamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirit eater of scraps, designation of a god sent on errands of destruction by sorcerers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua ʻai kahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a spirit that destroys its keeper; a god sent on an evil errand who returns to destroy his keeper rather than the victim; any evil practice, as excessive drinking, gossiping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua ʻai pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirit eater of filth. same as akua ʻai hamu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua ʻaumakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>supernatural with dual roles as akua to unrelated persons and ʻaumakua to relatives, as formerly the four major gods to high ranking chiefs, and later only as Pele, Hiʻiaka, and Laka to mortals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>"it" in a game of tag or hide-and-seek.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aku + demon. lā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>big-eyed or goggle-eyed scad fish (Trachurops crumenophthalmus), Stages of growth are pāʻāʻā, halalū or hahalalū, and akule.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>akuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>club-footed; deformity of the feet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ala hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a Molokaʻi wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Alakea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, probably used in navigation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Alakea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a downtown Honolulu street. lit., white road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Alakeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Alaska.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Alapiʻiakaʻōpae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lua fighting stroke. lit., stairway of the shrimp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Alaʻeli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind of Mānoa Valley, Honolulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Alaʻoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a Kauaʻi wind, said to bring good weather. lit., happy path.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Aliʻiokonaikalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as Kealiʻiokonaikalewa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala hele wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pedestrian's road, sidewalk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala holo papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden bridge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wake up early for no reason
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resurrection; to rise again, resurect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea course, path where one must swim past a projecting cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala kāpae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>detour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala maika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bowling alley
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala muku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cut off or unfinished road, dead-end road. fig., an incomplete rainbow, rainbow fragment
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night awakening.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala pōʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>orbit of the stars, circular road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala waele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>road, highway. lit., cleared road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe course.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala ʻoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>road cut, short cut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala ʻūlili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sheer trail as for climbing a cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fast, quickly. cf.
     alaheo, gone, departed   (heo depart in haste)
      alamimo, quick, fast   (mimo deft...)
     alapine₁, quick, fast   (pinepine often)
     alawiki, to hurry; quick, fast   (wiki quick)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• plank bridge, 
   • rough road over ravines or chasms, 
   • trestle, 
   • ladder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alahakaonuʻalolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of braid used in the pāpale ʻie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alahaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mountain ladder or steps cut into a cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>railway, railroad track. lit., iron road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gone, departed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large native shrub or small tree (Canthium odoratum; synonym Plectronia odorata) with shiny leaves and small, fragrant, white flowers. The wood is hard and was formerly used in making the ʻōʻō digging stick; also used medically.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaheʻe haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mock orange (Murraya paniculata), an ornamental hedge plant with shiny, dark-green leaves, small fragrant white flowers, and red berries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alahiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hem or finished border of a plaited mat or hat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alahukimoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marine railway. lit., road to pull ships.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alahula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a frequented and well-known path; to frequent such; 
   • to tread or trample, as on a taboo being broken. And.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small thin surfboard, as of breadfruit or koa wood, and heavier than the olo board.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alakaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leadership, guidance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alakuʻukuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place for climbing a cliff, usually with ropes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alakō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drag, pull along.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alakō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bird-catching pole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alamimo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quick, fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>awakening, rising.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alani kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all species of Pelea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alani wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a low native shrub (Pelea waialealae), found only on high, wet parts of Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth, even, not rough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaniho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long tattoo stripe. lit., tooth path.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brown seaweeds (Dictyota spp.), regularly divided into narrow segments. They are so bitter that they will taint other seaweeds put with them and can be eaten but little and by some are considered poisonous. Medical kahunas used them in small quantities to treat asthma. This name is sometimes qualified by the terms kai and ʻula. Also maka and false līpoa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an Oʻahu tree (Pelea sandwicensis or P. oahuensis), with oblong, fragrant leaves (like the mokihana of Kauaʻi), which were used for scenting tapa. The bark was used for medicine. Also other species of Pelea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alani₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an upland moss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alanui hele ʻaoʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sidewalk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alanui ākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>avenue, boulevard, wide street.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alanuionāhōkūhoʻokele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pathway of the navigator stars; star course followed by navigators. Probably also hōkū ʻai ʻāina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tunnel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>belly of a fish, considered choice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapine₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quick, fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapine₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frequent, often.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stairs, steps, ladder, stile, doorstep, ascent, scale (musical).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapiʻi kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steep road or path.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapiʻi lawe ʻōhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>escalator, moving stairs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapiʻi mele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>musical scale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gulp, swallow whole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shipwrecked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alapuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>body sores; to have such sores; affected with dry rot, as taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dividing, branching, as of winds and lineages.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light of early dawn, sunset glow. lit., flaming road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>channel, canal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alawela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark lines on stomach of a pregnant woman, converging near the navel. lit., burned path.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alawiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hurry; quick, fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alawī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shriek; shrill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alawī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upland bird, reported to be the young of the ʻanianiau, and on Kauaʻi, the ʻamakihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swallow whole, as a fish or shrimp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Heiau or temple that had no lele altar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaʻalai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of taro patch built on artificial mounds, known near Hiloas kipi; mucky claylike soil, as in this type of patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>river ford; place on a trail where one swims or wades across a stream.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaʻololī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>narrow path, lane, alley.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red dust in a road, red dust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alaʻume</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw, pull, attract, as a magnet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise up, arise, get up, come forward.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ala₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>there (same as the more frequent lā and -la). cf. e lākou ala, e lauala, e (verb) ala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aleale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wounded, pierced; wound, sore. Less common than pōaleale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish, said to be short for hīnālea, or a kind of hīnālea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alelo pala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coated tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alelo pelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tongue-tied, paralyzed tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alelo puʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paralysis of the tongue, believed sometimes caused by a kahuna. Also alelo pehu, alelo pelu, lelo puʻu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aleloahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of introduced flower (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alelo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tongue, language. Also elelo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alelo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>meat of the sea egg or sea urchin (wana), so called because of resemblance to a tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alelo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>concave curve of the lower portion of the lei palaoa, whale-tooth pendant, suggestive of a tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alelo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>point at the tip of a paddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lowland perennial weed (Boerhaavia repens), with long, thin, prostrate branches, bearing small leaves and flowers. The swollen roots were used medicinally, acting as a diuretic. Anena on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swallow, engulf, gulp, absorb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollow or cavern on the sea floor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ale₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic mountain plant (Plantago princeps), 60 cm to 2 m high, rarely branching, stem woody, with long narrow leaves at top; related to the laukahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wait, stop; before; usually as a command: Stop! Wait a minute!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crystal clear, white; clarity, whiteness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi hoʻomalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>presiding officer, ruling officer; chairman, viceroy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>military officer, officer of army or navy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi koa i komikina ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commissioned officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi koa uku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warrant officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi kuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>power behind the throne. lit., supplementary king.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male chief, king; husband (polite, not said of one's own husband or to him).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi kūʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>independent chief, aristocrat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>true chief, commissioned officer (old term).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi palapala hoʻokohu ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>non-commissioned officer, petty officer (old term).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offspring of a high chiefess and commoner (or lesser chief) father.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi poʻe kauā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lesser chiefs who served other chiefs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi pūʻō lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an exalted chief (probably from pūʻoʻa, tower).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chiefess, queen; wife (polite, not said of one's own wife or to her).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi waʻapā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boatswain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi ʻai moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief who rules a moku (district).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻi ʻānela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Archangel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aliʻipoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the ornamental cannas (Canna indica, forms and hybrids), large tropical American herbs, with large oval or narrow leaves and large red or red and yellow flowers. The round black seeds are worn in leis and are also placed in fruit shells of the laʻamia for hula rattles. Cannas are both cultivated and wild in Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in the presence of chiefs; royal court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloalo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>squilla (Pseudosquilla ciliata, Lysiosquilla maculata), highly desired as food. Also Squilla sp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloalo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loved and served by many persons, as a chief or favorite child; esteemed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloalo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa made from māmaki mixed with wauke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloha hoahānau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brotherhood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloha kakahiaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>good morning...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloha ʻoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>may you be loved or greeted, greetings (to one person).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloha ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pitiless, merciless, ungrateful, without love or affection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aloha ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>love of the land or of one's country, patriotism; the name of a Hawaiian-language newspaper published 1893–1920; aloha ʻāina is a very old concept, to judge from the many sayings (perhaps thousands) illustrating deep love of the land. (Aloha ʻāina) in (PN 268–9) cf. the song Kaulana nā Pua (EM 62–4).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alohalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given to the kāmole plant used in hana aloha sorcery. lit., mutual love.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alohaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bible spelling of aloha ai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alohiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>families united by marriage, in-laws.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alokahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>single weft in plaiting; mat of a single thickness, with only one shiny side. lit., single side.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alokele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>attractive, of fine appearance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alokele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red bird reported by Kepelino (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alolua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two-sided, two-faced; facing one another, as cliffs on opposite sides of a valley.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alolua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double weft in plaiting; plaiting with a reversible side, with two thicknesses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alopihe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>persons shouting, as in mourning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alopiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>belly of a fish, choice to Hawaiians.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>combined, acting together; to cooperate, act together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alu like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>work together...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alualu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to follow, pursue, chase; 
   • to run, as for political office.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>alāiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>appropriation of property by force, as practiced by some chiefs on their travels; to do so
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Amu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a Kauaʻi wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outrigger float; port hull of a double canoe, so called because it replaces the float.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>amo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry a burden on the shoulders, to lift weights; a burden. fig., responsibility.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>amo kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stick for carrying burdens on the shoulder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>amoamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to raise or mount high, as waves; high, raised.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>amu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to curse, revile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>amu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Anianiikalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star said to be in the Milky Way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana hola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hourglass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surveying, to measure the surface of the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana hoʻohālike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>model, pattern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana kaumaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to weigh; weight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>measurement of length.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tempo marker in music; Maelzel's metronome marker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana mekela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>metric weight and measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana paona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scales, balance; to weigh. lit., pound (Eng.) measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana piha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>measurement of capacity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana piwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thermometer, for taking temperatures; to take temperature. lit., fever (Eng.) measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana puka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>underground passage, tunnel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain gauge; to measure rainfall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water meter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>liquid measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana wela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thermometer, measurement of heat; to measure heat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>without equal, unsurpassed, immeasureable, incomparable (in this sense, similar, to launa ʻole and lua ʻole), limitless, unlimited, never satisfied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land surveying; to survey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana ʻōlaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seismograph. lit. machine to measure earthquakes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anaanapau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move briskly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anahonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>geometry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anahuinakolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trigonometry. lit. triangular measurement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anahulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>period of ten days; for ten days; to pass ten days.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anahulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large moana, a fish from 30 to 80 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reflection of light.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>congregation, audience, assembly, gathering, crowd; to assemble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anaina hoʻolewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>funeral wake or gathering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anaina hoʻomana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>congregation for worship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anainaʻike aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>royal reception or audience.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anakahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unit of measurement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>analio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tail feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>analipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distance, faraway space, beyond the horizon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fathom: formerly the distance between tips of longest fingers of a man, measured with arms extended on each side; Catholic writers equated anana with one meter; to count by this measurement or by fathoms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ananea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leafless, bare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ananū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turnip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ananū pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>daikon. lit., bad-smelling turnip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cubic measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anapuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boundary, circumference, perimeter; to encircle, go around.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anawaena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diameter. lit., middle measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anaʻuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mealybug (Coccidae) and scale insects.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anaʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to save for future use.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have enough or too much, satisfied, satiated, surfeited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cave, grotto, cavern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>larynx.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>after e (verb). see e (verb) ana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ana₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>following verbs indicating a single event, whether a command or a statement, whether completed or incompleted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aneane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faint, feeble, exhausted; nauseous dizziness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ane₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a dermestid beetle that destroys feathers in feather-work; 
   • mites, as in chickens; 
   • ringworm; 
   • insect-eaten, gnawed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ane₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the breath of life, passing of a breeze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ane₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pimple, scabies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to beckon, wave; beckoning.
   • to blow softly, as a breeze; 
   • to draw a net over the surface of water; 
   • to pass over the surface, as a hand
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ani peʻahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wave or beckon, as with the hand, fan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani hoʻonui ʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>magnifying glass, microscope, telescope. lit., glass to enlarge vision.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani ipu kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lamp chimney.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani kilohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mirror, looking glass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani kukui uila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>electric-light bulb. lit., electric light glass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>standing mirror.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani nānā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mirror, looking glass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani paʻa lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hand mirror.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• mirror, 
   • glass; 
   • clear, transparent, 
   • obvious.   
Several types of aniani are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aniani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• cool, refreshing; to blow softly, gently. 
   • fig., to travel swiftly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ania₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breezy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ania₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dry, parched, barren.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anohale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>individual presiding over the ʻume game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ano₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• awe, reverence, peacefulness, sacredness, holiness;
   • feeling of awe, fear, or oppression; 
   • weird solitude, oppressive quiet; 
   • awestruck, lost in thought.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ano₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>time (in songs, and usually before ahiahi, rarely before kakahiaka).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anuhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cool, soft fragrance, as of upland forests; sweetness; to be cool, fragrant, and sweet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>anu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cold, influenza; to have a cold.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Aohōkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, possibly Jupiter, lit., star light.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao akua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>godly cloud. fig., rainbow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao kuewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>realm of homeless spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long cloud; high or distant cloud; stratus cloud along the horizon. fig., a distinguished person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao ʻōnohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloud with rainbow (ʻōnohi) colors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aoaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small seaside shrub (Wikstroemia sp.). The root bark is used externally for sores, and stems and bark of branches for coughs. Branches and leaves are mixed with rasped seeds of Barringtonia asiatica (syn. B. speciosa) to stupefy fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aokanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to think or behave reasonably; human enlightment, civilization; rational.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain cloud, mist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aouli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>firmament, sky, blue vault of heaven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any kind of a cloud, including ʻōpua, but specifically, high clouds that when wind-blown scud along (kaʻa). cf: 
   aokū, rain cloud, mist
   ao loa, long cloud; high or distant cloud...
   ao ʻōnohi, cloud with rainbow (ʻōnohi) colors. 
   aouli, firmament, sky, blue vault of heaven. 
   ʻōpua, puffy clouds, as banked up near the horizon
   pālāmoa, pāpalamoa, thick, dense, as clouds
   puapuaʻa, plural of puaʻa₃, bank of clouds...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>world, earth, realm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be careful, beware, watch out.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the exact image of (preceded by a ʻe).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fine mat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ao₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ap</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation for ʻāpana, land parcel, used in surveying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apo hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>orbit, as of stars and planets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apo kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gold bracelet; formerly a gold ring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apo pepeiao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hoop earring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apo pāpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hatband.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apo ʻāʻī ʻīlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dog collar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apoapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hill, as of sweet potatoes; bunch, as of taro; to hill up plants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apohao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>iron hoop or band, named for the king's guard under the monarchy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apowaena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parentheses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apoālewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>highest heavens or space.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• circle, circuit, hoop, loop, band, 
   • bracelet, hoop-shaped earring, ring, 
   • girdle, belt, 
   • to span, reach around, 
   • embrace, put an arm around, clasp. 
Many compounds with apo are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>union of the molar or cheekbone with the temporal bone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apuapu ʻānai makau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>file or polisher for fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apuapu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>file, rasp; to smooth or sharpen with a file.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apuapu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beard of a fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apuhihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shellfish resembling the hīhīwai, found in brackish water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>apu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to snap or snatch with the teeth; snatching. 
   • fig., to destroy, ravage, ruin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Auhaele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, companion to Hōkūʻula and Paikauhale. Perhaps the three are Sigma, Antares, and Tau Scorpii.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Auhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Aukele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for ʻAukelenuiaiku, a hero.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Aukoaʻeuamālie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a stroke in lua fighting. lit.., tropic bird hastens, it is calm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au kō malalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>undertow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au nele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard times, depression, recession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pass...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bitter gall. fig.., ingratitude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look, observe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>this word is related to uahi, smoke. One source says it refers to lowly or humble persons. (Malo 109) says it may refer to a distant relationship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auakeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dishonest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ghost-ridden; haunted or unfriendly land. lit., ghost bile. cf. (Isa. 13.9) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aualaliha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ʻoʻopu goby fish found in both brackish and fresh water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aualaloʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>terraced taro patches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aualiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>royal, chiefly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auaneʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soon, by-and-by, presently, shortly, just. cf. auaneʻi₂
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auaneʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• probably, 
   • merely, 
   • probably not, 
   • possibly, 
   • doubtful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as au₁, period of time, era...; to walk lightly and swiftly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auau₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to walk lightly and swiftly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an unknown herb, the bark and leaves of which were used as medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auhele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go looking from place to place without any definite course, to drift or sail aimlessly, drifting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn off the course, wander, deviate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auhonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient age, era, epoch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auhuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overturn, overthrow, upset; to till.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auhā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>molting, of a chicken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auhā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outhouse, as for storing canoes; shed, shelter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weary, exhausted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>desolate, dreary, nonproductive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• even, 
   • smooth,
   • clear. 
   • fig., suave and pleasant in speech and manner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>united, flowing together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep coral bed with overlapping ledges where fishes hide.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for au kanaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inhabited place, settlement; inhabited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apprentice canoe maker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crowded, close.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agitated; agitation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pitch and toss; to raise, lift.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uphill path.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aukū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shallow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather leaves to wrap fish in for cooking, as leaves of pōhuehue, mānewanewa, lauaʻe, ti; to frighten fish into a net with leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aulele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fly, as a frightened flock of birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aulike₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>even, smooth, as timber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aulike₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat kindly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mildew.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stunted, sun-baked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aumaiewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large-mouthed net placed at the wings of the papa hului net to receive fish; used in deep water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aumiha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to float off in the air, as miasma; 
   • evil spirits thought to attend graves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aumihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grieve, regret, be sorry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aumiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outgoing current.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aumiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fresh water mixed with noni juice, drunk after kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aumoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to care for; protected.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shelter or shed, as for canoes; outhouse, temporary house; tabernacle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aupaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>some representatives of an endemic genus (Isodendrion), members of the violet family. They are small shrubs beating greenish-white or reddish flowers, which have equal petals and none spurred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aupaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau name for naupaka kahakai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aupoʻipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>according to (Kep) and (Kam), a relationship extending back 24 generations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aupula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing with a pula stick or pūlale to drive fish into a net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auwaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distant, remote, deep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auwalakī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entangled, snarled, as fishline.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auwalakī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>destitute, especially of the rich who lose ever everything.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auwaʻalālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paper nautilus (Argonauta argo). lit., fleet of canoes with two sails.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auwehekika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name recorded for kauā, outcasts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auālipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overcome by intense emotion, as love, grief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auēuē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a calling, crying, humming, buzzing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ouch!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>auʻāpaʻapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>passing of much time on a piece of land, as an old family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rub, massage, polish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to set, as a net or fish trap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₁₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hedyotis acuminata, a native shrub (coffee family), with small green flowers, and unpleasant-smelling, ovate or narrower leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>current; to flow, as a current.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• movement, motion; to move, stir; 
   • eddy, 
   • tide, 
   • drift, float, 
   • walk, 
   • hurry, 
   • succession or train, as of thought, trend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gall, bile (Oihk. 3.4) ; gall bladder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weather.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small sweet potatoes of poor quality that grow from the vine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pumice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grain of wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>au₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to weed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awa kalamoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large awa, milkfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awa kū moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ship harbor or anchorage, port.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awa lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many channels
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awa ʻaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a herring-like fish, sometimes called tenpounder or tarpon (Elops hawaiensis); according to some, a medium-sized awa fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awaikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>good spirits, as the messengers of Kāne, who guarded people from evil ghosts and managed the rain, winds, and weather.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awaiāulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bind securely, fasten, as of the marriage tie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where bones of chiefs were hidden, as in a cave, lit., eternal harbor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>port, harbor, cove; channel or passage, as through a reef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>milkfish (Chanos chanos). Stages of growth are pua awa (puawa), young; awa ʻaua, medium size; awa, commercial size; awa kalamoho, very large.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aweawe poi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drip of poi; an insult to the chiefs of Hawaiʻi, playing on the name of their chiefs, Keawe, with implication that poi is excreted in a sticky chain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aweawe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tenacious, 
   • sticky, adhesive; glueyness,
   • threadlike,  threads.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aweawe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wake, as of a ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• strand, thread; 
   • thin, 
   • soft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wake of a ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>awāwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>valley, gulch, ravine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of surprise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Aʻe Loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for the trade wind. see ex., kiʻekiʻe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Aʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>northeast tradewind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vein, blood vessel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa kolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a root running horizontally that produces roots below and above; a rhizome, creeping root.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa kūkūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>varicose veins. lit., raised veins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broken blood vessel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa puʻupuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>capsular ligament.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa puʻupuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>knots in a fish net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa pūhaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>girdle, belt. lit., loin belt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻaahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scion or shoot of sandalwood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻahuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aching veins, varicose veins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻalele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pulse. lit., leaping vein.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻalolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nerve. lit., brain vein.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻapau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>valve of a vein.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>network of veins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• small root, rootlet, 
   • vein, artery, nerve, tendon, muscle. 
   • fig., womb, offspring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to send greetings or love; 
   • joyous hospitality; 
   • joy at greeting a loved one.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻe nei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>just now, lately; nearby, not far; ordinary, insignificant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻeaʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixing of a dark or brilliant color with a lighter one, as feathers in a lei; of dark hair of a young person with streaks of gray; to mix, as drinks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻeaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of banana with green and white striped leaves and fruits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻeaʻe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>directional part. aʻe + demon. lā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>several native trees, the soapberry (Sapindus saponaria f. inaequalis), and all species of Zanthoxylum (also known as Fagara, Zanthoxylum having yellowish wood formerly used for digging sticks and spears); seeds of all (largest in the soapberry) are black, round, and used for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻe₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>replacement of e in songs (commonly written a e, but a glottal stop is pronounced before ʻe).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻe₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maui name for maua₂, trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻiaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bright as moonlight; brightness, 
   • fair, 
   • white, 
   • clear, clearness
   • pure,
   • brilliant, shining;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻiaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native tree or shrub (Streblus sandwicensis [Pseudomorus sandwicensis and P. brunoniana are synonyms]), with narrow-ovate leaves, and milky sap; a member of the fig family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>replacing i often in songs; usually written a i.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to teach while traveling; to act as itinerant teacher, preacher, missionary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo heluhelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reader, primer; to learn or teach to read.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo hōkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>astronomy, astronomer; to teach or learn astronomy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo kepela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spelling book; to learn or teach spelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo kiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manual of punctuation; to learn or teach punctuation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo loko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>innermost teaching, inspiration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo palapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>instruction, education; to teach or learn writing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo piliʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grammar, instruction in grammar; to teach or learn grammar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻoaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stratagem, plot, 
   • advice, counsel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>replacing o, of, and ʻo, subject marker, in songs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻu kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broadbill swordfish (Xiphias gladius).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻu lepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sailfish (Istiophorus orientalis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻu papaʻohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of aʻu fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻuaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small aʻu fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻukī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish, perhaps a marlin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swordfish, sailfish, marlin, spearfish (Istiophoridae). See sayings, laʻa₂, ʻoloʻolo₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>aʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>my, mine (a-form, zero-class).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>A₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation of ʻākau, north, as in surveying reports.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>e (verb) ai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>particles indicating imperative/intentive mood and accompanying subordinate verbs (ai in this case is the anaphoric ai).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>e (verb) nei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>particles indicating imperfect aspect and future tense and accompanying subordinate verbs. The nei indicates action here or now. See (Gram. 5.2).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>e lākou ala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to e lākou nei, you there (usually affectionate), but persons addressed are farther away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>e lākou nei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>you (pl.), you there (usually affectionate). (Shortened vocative e + pronoun lākou + zero demon.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>e ue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(this is sometimes said today as a chant ending, but is probably an innovation.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eaea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>air, breath, air current. Some confusion exists in the uses of eaea, ʻeaʻea, and ʻeʻaʻeʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eaea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise; high waves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eaea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a smell, as of seaweed; to smell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eamāmā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gas. lit., light air.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eaolamāmā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oxygen. lit., light life breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eaʻaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gas. lit., burning air.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sovereignty, 
   • rule, independence. 
    [Lā Hoʻihoʻi Ea, literally the day sovereignty was restored, a holiday celebrated in the Kingdom of Hawaiʻi. Set on July 31, modern observations of this day include ceremonies taking place at different sites around Hawaiʻi, including a key commemoration at Thomas Square in Honolulu.]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• life, spirit (Isa. 42.5) .
   • air,  breeze, 
   • breath, respiration, 
   • vapor, gas; fumes, as of tobacco;  
This ea, as well as ea₁,₃,₄, is sometimes pronounced or sung ʻea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise, go up, raise, become erect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ea₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smell. Also ʻea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ehoʻikauʻiomānoauaahiahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a lua stroke. lit., let the hero of Mānoa return, [it's] evening. (E- is sometimes omitted.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to breathe hard, pant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>song refrain. (EM 67)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehehene₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to laugh merrily, giggle in glee; laughter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehehene₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>syllables repeated for musical effect at end of verses, similar to ēhē.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehehoʻopiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carved parallel or undulating lines on a tapa beater and on tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eheʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name recorded for adult stage of hāpuʻu fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehuehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• animation varying from fury and storm to power and majesty, animated, animation. 
   • violent; violence
   • anger, fury; furious
   • powerful
   • majesty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehuehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>healthy, vigorous. Less used than ahuahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehuehu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of rock, used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as:
   • ʻehu₁ spray, foam, mist...; 
   • ʻehu₂ dust, dusty...; 
   • ʻehu₃ pollen...; 
   • ʻehu₄ faint, difficult to see...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water or water mixed with fragrant herbs used in sprinkling or gently rubbing a patient to revive him from fainting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ehu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. name for ʻōlapa₂, Cheirodendron trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ei neʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>here, here it is.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia (nō) naʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>but, furthermore, however.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia aku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>approaching, nearby, soon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia ala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>here, here it is; you over there, you.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia aʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>here close by, here approaching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia hou hoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>and again, furthermore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia hoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>and, finally, behold.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia iho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wait a moment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia kekahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>but withal, moreover, furthermore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia kā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>so at last, then.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>this place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scorched.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of eia, especially before words beginning with a-.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ei₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rather frequent variation of the anaphoric ai (ai₃) in fast speech, but seldom if ever found so in printed form.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ekele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plant listed (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ekikilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stench that draws flies; bad-smelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ekoeko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of eko; extremely bad-smelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>elehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slate or ash-colored pumice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>elelo lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double-tongued, deceitful; trickster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eluehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Molokaʻi name for ʻūlei, a shrub.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emi hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to return, go backward, withdraw, back up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emi kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go backward with stooped back, as from the presence of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emi pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lose weight rapidly, as due to sickness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheap, inexpensive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flat (in music).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emowai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an addition of water, as for mixing poi. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoo away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>emu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rid plants of weeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• first attempts of an infant to move; 
   • to draw up knees and push elbows, 
   • to crawl, creep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>enene₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dilate, as nostrils.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lose, be defeated, beaten (if followed immediately by an animate subject and then by i-iā marking agent); 
   • to win, beat; winning, victory (in other environments).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>epaepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>part of a fish's tail above and below the cleft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>epaepa huila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>propeller blade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spelling occasionally found for e, part. + u, plural prefix (see (For. 5:507)).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ewe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Eve.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• unstable, 
   • swaying, 
   • wandering; 
   • strayed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yes, I am here (in answer to a call by name, or to a name chant in one's honor).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>call; to call, answer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eʻe kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to climb mountains; mountain climber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eʻe moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to board a ship; ship passenger; immigrant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eʻea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise up frequently, as in water; to bob up and down.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>eʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to climb on, mount, get on, 
   • go aboard, board, 
   • embark;
   • one who climbs, mounts, boards; 
   • step. 
   cf. eʻe kuahiwi, eʻe moku, hikieʻe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>e₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>by, by means of (follows a pas/imp.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haehaekamanuokānealoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the birds of Kānealoha tear to bits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haika Paka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hyde Park.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Haiti, Haitian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakakāamoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of lua fighting in which the contestants did not use their hands, but fought with feet, legs, shoulders, head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakalauʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star associated with Hanakauluna, considered a sign of pestilence or calamity; also the name of a legendary place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakamoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a constellation. lit., chicken roost.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakaʻano₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Hālawa, Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakuhiva</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Fatu Hiva.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakuhiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Fatu Hiva.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakuohawaiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Prince Albert, only son of Kamehameha IV and Queen Emma who died at the age of four in 1862, "leaving his father and mother heartbroken and the native community in desolation". lit., lord of Hawaiʻi. See chant, kiakahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hakupōkano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., lord of dark night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Halakepoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hartford.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hale ʻAhaʻōlelo Aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>House of Nobles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Halekuʻi o Papela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Tower of Babel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Halemano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a romantic Oʻahu anti-hero who wooed, sometimes with success, the beautiful but fickle Puna princess, Kamalālāwalu. The account of the kilu (quoits) match contains some of the most beautiful of Hawaiian poetry. At the end of the tale the lovers apparently tire of one another. see ʻAikanaka₃.  lit., many houses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Halemauʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a Hāna wind. lit., grass house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Halulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a legendary man-eating bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Halāliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a pleasure-loving chief of Niʻihau in ancient times. His name became synonymous with fun-making.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hana-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bay, valley (only in place names, as Hanalei, Hanapēpē. Also Hono-, as in Honolulu).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanakahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient chief of Hilo whose name was used in poetry to designate the Hilo district.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanakalauʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star associated with Hanakauluna, and the name of a legendary place. lit., Hana, the abundant food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanakauluna₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star associated with Hanakalauʻai, and Hakalauʻai; all were omens of pestilence or calamity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanakauluna₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a death stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanakaʻiluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a lua stroke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanalei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a large valley on Kauaʻi. lit., lei  valley. see saying kaupoku₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Henry.[word play: Henry / hungry]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanowa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hanover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanowela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hanover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hanuipiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting. lit., rising breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hapa Pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Harper's Ferry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hauaʻiliki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a handsome surfer of Kauaʻi who vainly wooed Lāʻieikawai (SH 214-15); also a place name on Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haukomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the blow enters...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haulani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a personal name. lit., ruling royal chief (this meaning is based solely on historical evidence: see hau-₂).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haumea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an earth-mother goddess equated with Papa, Laʻilaʻi₃, and Kāmehaʻikana, the 'great source of female fertility' (HM 185) who bore children in successive generations. She is also called '[Haumea] … of mysterious forms, Haumea of eightfold forms, Haumea of four-hundred-thousand-fold forms...' (KL. 232). She married Wākea and later married Hāloa, her husband's son by his own daughter Hoʻohokukalani. Haumea had many other husbands. She is considered the mother of Pele and of Pele's many siblings who were born from her mouth or armpits. She presided over childbirth. Beckwith has summarized the many tales about her (HM 276-290). see Kaulu; Punaʻaikoaʻe; Kāmehaʻikana. lit., red ruler.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haunakelekele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star in the Milky Way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haunaʻīloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haunone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a cold wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hauomāʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind associated with Kailua quadrangle, Hawaiʻi. lit., cool [wind] of Māʻihi (a wind goddess whose full name was Māʻihiʻalakapualono, fragrant sacred Māʻihi [child] of Lono).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haupalemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the drowned blow...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hawaiʻi piha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full-blooded Hawaiian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hawaiʻiloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a legendary figure believed by some to have discovered Hawaiʻi, but see Barrère-1969; place name. lit. distant Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hawaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Harvard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haʻi manawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>The Times (name of a publication).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haʻilono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haʻinakolo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a forest-dwelling goddess of tapa makers and bird catchers, sometimes referred to in chants as Haʻiwahine or Haʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haʻinakolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a legendary woman who had many adventures. She was deserted by her husband and ran away crazed at Waipiʻo, Hawaiʻi. lit., grumbling answer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haʻiwahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variant name for Haʻinakolo₁, a forest-dwelling goddess of tapa makers and bird catchers...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haʻi₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. spelling of Haʻinakolo₁ a forest-dwelling goddess...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Haʻo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae Hawaiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hibiscus. lit., Hawaiian flag, from having red petals striped with white.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae Hawaiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carnation (Dianthus caryophyllus), petals red with white stripes, formerly a great favorite with Hawaiians.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae Hawaiʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of plumeria.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haehae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tear to bits, tease;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haehae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro in the piko group, characterized by having the two basal lobes of the leaf blade separated up to the piko (point of joining with the leaf stem); a hardy taro often grown commercially for poi, formerly common at Kaʻanapali, Maui, where strong winds tore the leaves (hence haehae).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haekoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bloodthirsty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go, come (dual or plural).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>-na₁ form with hae₁,₂,₃; wildness; barking; tearing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haeola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>murderous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild, fierce, vicious, furious, savage, ferocious; fury, rage; to rage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bark (Isa. 56.10) , growl, snap, as a dog; to chirp noisily or scold, as a mynah bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flag, banner (perhaps so called because a piece of torn [hae] tapa was used as a banner).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hae₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flowers. see hae Hawaiʻi₁,₂,₃
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haha kāʻupena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>net spacer or mesh stick, gauge used in making meshes in nets, made of wood, turtle shell, bone, bamboo, whale rib, coconut shell, or metal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small sweet potatoes removed in thinning a hill. Kaʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahai manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bird hunter, fowler; to hunt birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>empty, void; somewhat deflated, as a balloon; half rotten, as wood, taro. fig., hungry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heat, warmth; warm, sultry, hot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>enema.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to insert, put in.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahape</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahau kākua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hurl a blow by swinging from the shoulders.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to strike, hit, whip, beat, switch, smite, wield, thrash; whip, lash, stroke; a blow.
   • to throw down, as a playing card with force; to play, as a card or kōnane pebble; 
   • to trump; 
   • to insert; 
   • to bat, as a ball;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to offer a prayer or sacrifice; 
   • to lay before.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to build, as by laying bricks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahaʻi lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break in two. fig., bad luck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahaʻi malū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to follow secretly, "tail", stalk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break into pieces; to break off, as to thin sweet potato vines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahaʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>painful swelling, as in the groin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proud, haughty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plump, fleshy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahei₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be bound fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lacking in flesh, thin; to fail, of an invalid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(see ex., mānewanewa₂).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hahu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clear, smooth; to purge, as the bowels.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hai ao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>day sacrifice; to sacrifice by daylight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hai pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night religious service, sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hai ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>food offering; to offer vegetable food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hai-₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>simulative prefix similar to haʻa-, similar in meaning to the causative/simulative hoʻo-... see 
     haikea, same as hākea₁, pale... (kea₁, white, clear...)
      hailawe, to exchange, barter... (lawe₁, to take, transport, carry, bring, haul...)
     hailepo, ash-gray pallor; to have this pallor... (lepo₁, dirt, earth, ground, filth...)
     hailuku, to stone. fig., to hurt the feelings... (luku, to massacre, destroy, slaughter...)
     haipule,  religious, devout, pious, reverent... (pule₁, to pray, worship, say grace...)
     haiʻula, same as hāʻula, reddish... (ʻula₁, red, scarlet...)
     haiwā, to plant far apart, as taro, coconut... (wa₄, space, interval...)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haialo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., follow the presence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haiamū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gather, crowd, flock; 
   • in great numbers, as ripening fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haihaiā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wicked person; wicked, unholy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haihaiā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prevent the gods from hearing a rival's curses by acting insane (eating poison, going naked), thus diverting the god's curses to himself and freeing the victim; with his superior mana he turns the curses away from himself and on to the rival sorcerer (Kam. 64:140–1); to prevent gods from hearing by offering herbs and medicine (And).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make faces; 
   • a grimace of defiance and contempt; 
the corners of the mouth were drawn back tightly, the teeth separated, chin and lower teeth twisting from side to side; 
   • perhaps the figure-eight mouthed images were inspired by this violent fighting expression.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haikala muku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cramps, less severe than haikala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haikala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>severe cramps, said to have often proved fatal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haikala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>asthma.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haika₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gasp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haikea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of tapa (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haikina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hyacinth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exchange, barter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailepo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ash-gray pallor; to have this pallor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailepo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient pestilence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailepo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of the sting rays, perhaps hīhīmanu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haili aka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shadowy form of a ghost.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haili moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>recollected dream, vision.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailimoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shellfish resembling the wana, but with short spines, possibly Tripneustes or Echinometra.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailiopua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native fern (Schizaea robusta) found in high mountain wet areas believed to be the plant form of the sorcery goddess Pua; sometimes used as a psychological remedy to ward off the evil influence of Pua.  lit., Pua's memory. Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirit, ghost; dim, indistinct.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellow band, as on the tail of ono, the fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• divination, casting lots, throwing dice; 
   • to test 
   • (also used interchangeably with hōʻailona).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stone. fig., to hurt the feelings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hailōkeaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the card game high-low-jack-and-the-game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offering, sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainaki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer removing the taboo on land after the taxes had been collected (an example of a pule hainaki is in (Malo 146–7)).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainaki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quarter of a roasted pig reserved for priests at the laukini service (Malo 174); to offer such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainakā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handkerchief, napkin (rare).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainakā lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neckerchief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainakā pakeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pocket handkerchief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainakā paʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pocket handkerchief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainakā pepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paper handkerchief, cleaning tissue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainakā ʻāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neckerchief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hainā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cruel, unmerciful, heartless; to abuse, treat cruelly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haipule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>religious, devout, pious, reverent; piety, a pious person; to worship; to hold prayers or service, as to consecrate a heiau; church service.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haiwā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plant far apart, as taro, coconut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haiā kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male retainer of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haiā wahine₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>female retainer of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haiā wahine₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wicked woman, concubine
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haiā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>retainer or follower of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haiʻeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ʻaʻawa lelo, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offering, sacrifice; to offer, sacrifice. cf:
   haina, offering, sacrifice
   hai ʻai,  food offering; to offer vegetable food
   haialo, lit. follow the presence. same as haiā₁, retainer or follower of a chief...
   haiau, var. of heiau
   haipule, religious, devout, pious; to worship; to hold prayers or service, as to consecrate a heiau...
   heiau pre-Christian place of worship, shrine...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hire, employ.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka ipu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shelf for calabashes; frame from which calabashes were hung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perch, shelf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka kaulaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drying frame or rack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>altar platform, especially where human sacrifices were laid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka lāʻau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden trough, flume.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to observe carefully, stare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka ʻula a Kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poetic name for the rainbow. lit., red perch of Kāne.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>medium or one possessed, who speaks; one who reports to a chief, especially the misdeeds of others.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka ʻūlili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ladder, trestle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakahaka leo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ghostly voice, spirit voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakahakaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rainbow with much green color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakahaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• vacant space, vacancy, room; 
   • blanks, as in a questionnaire; 
   • gap;
   • thin, emaciated, especially of one with hollow chest or sunken features.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container, bag, named for Haggai (Hagai 1.6) , who carried a bag with holes [spoken humorously].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>myrtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bloated, swollen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to straddle. fig., a tall thin person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakauluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as lona, canoe rest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakaupili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand intently watching, as a thief [said to be the name of a legendary rat thief]; to stand precariously, as at the edge of a cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frail, weak; thin, as tapa or a dress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakā pahi kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>duel with swords.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakā pūpanapana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pistol duel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakāamoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cockfight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crowded, overlapping, entangled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand on stilts, as a spider.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frame, platform, as for drying fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakalina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>showy, pompous, vain, as of one's attire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakalī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakanea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kanea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakanele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be worthless, useless; uselessness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakanū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>silent, sullen; struck dumb, as in amazement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakapō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>darkness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakaʻano₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breach, as in mist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• shelf, perch, platform; 
   • roost, as for chickens; 
   • fish spear rack; 
   • rack for suspending water gourds and other household objects; 
   • rack attached to booms of double canoe to hold spears and other objects; 
   • ladder
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>recipient; medium, oracle, one possessed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crested feather helmet, so called because the crest perches on the helmet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hole, breach, open space, vacancy; empty, vacant, full of holes or spaces.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stare, gaze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place wood in a ground oven, to lay an oven fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haka₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heart, hearts, in a deck of cards.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakia koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bloody stools.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• broken piece, remnant, scrap, fragment; 
   • portion, 
   • balance, 
   • section, 
   • fraction, as in arithmetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina kūpaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>improper fraction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina kūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proper fraction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common fraction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina pānaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reciprocal number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina pāʻumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decimal fraction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>food fragment, scrap, morsel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakina ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portion of a word, syllable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakiʻopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to limp, hobble, amble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hako</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dignified, noble, honorable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>landlord, house owner, host, hostess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overseer, superintendent, employer, boss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku hulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plait, as feathers; featherworker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku mele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poet, composer; to compose song or chant; those that speak in proverbs. cf. haku o ke mele, owner of the chant, the one for whom a chant was composed rather than the composer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku moʻolelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>author, story writer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manager, as of a plantation or firm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku puke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>author.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wife of a chief, lady, woman of high rank; female employer or supervisor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard core in a breast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make up, invent, fabricate, improvise; fabricator.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku ʻōhiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ʻŌhiʻa log to be carved into a canoe (also malu ʻōhiʻa, (Kam. 76:136)); main ʻōhiʻa image in a heiau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>author, writer, reporter; to compose, as narrative or story; to slander, fabricate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku ʻōnohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyeball.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakualo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>belly, lower abdomen; belly fin and flesh of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakuhaku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lumpy, as poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakuhaku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fold, as tapa; to arrange, put in order.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakukele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wet, lumpy, as poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakukole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to defame, ridicule, as in figurative language and chant; defamer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakukoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• disturbed, agitated, excited; 
   • to surge, excite, rush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakuone₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small land division, as cultivated for a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakuone₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inland pond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakupapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sew feathers to a band, as for a hat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakupaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>new taro patch. lit., hard core.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakupehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hesitating, slow; to walk or speak with hesitation; to stalk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakupeʻoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to limp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakuʻepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to deceive, fabricate; 
   • liar; deceitful.
   • malicious gossip;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakuʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>landowner; landlord.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haku₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• core, 
   • lump, as of poi; 
   • stone, 
   • coconut sponge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>packed full, protruding, bulging, cramfull, swollen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rising, bulging; bulge; to rise, as the moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala Polapola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of pandanus. lit., Borabora [Tahitian] hala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala hua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a female pandanus bearing fruit, contrasting with hala hīnano.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala hua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nut in a pandanus key.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala hīnano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a male pandanus bearing the hīnano blossom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala iwi nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard pandanus key, not suitable for leis. fig., hard-appearing, dissatisfied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala iʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sin of eating a forbidden fish or meat; failure to offer essence of fish or flesh to the gods before consuming it; to commit such offenses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the pineapple (Ananas comosus), probably originating in Brazil, of great commercial importance. lit., foreign hala. see hala kea and hala ʻula for what some Hawaiians call native varieties, still said to be growing wild in the forests at Puna, Hawaiʻi. called hala on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala kapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sin of breaking clothing taboos; to sin thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>said by some Hawaiians to be a native variety of pineapple; plant spreading vinelike; leaves with thorny edges; fruit plain green when unripe, yellow when ripe, small, fragrant, good-tasting; pieces of the skin were used for hat leis. lit., white hala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala lihilihi ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variety of hala with keys bright yellow at base, grading to bright orange-red at top, and smaller than hala ʻīkoi. lit., red-edged hala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gone a long distance or time; far.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala melemele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a common form of pandanus with bright yellow keys.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala mōʻī wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of pineapple. lit., queen pineapple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala pepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native trees (Dracaena [Pleomele] spp) in the lily family, with narrow leaves in tufts at branch ends and with clustered round yellow fruits. (Neal 205–6). This was one of the five standard plants used in the hula altar to Laka. see more under palai (Neal 12).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala pia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an indigenous variety of pandanus, with keys 4 cm long, canary-yellow and small; head small, about 15 by 12 cm., used in medical prescription and for exorcising evil spirits. It was much prized for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala ʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pandanus key that is ripe and soft, suitable for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala ʻula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pandanus with fruit sections entirely orange-red; same size as hala ʻīkoi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala ʻula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of pineapple similar to hala kea, but leaves and unripe fruit red-tinged.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala ʻīkoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of hala with keys 7 cm long, lemon-colored at base, changing abruptly to bright-orange in upper half; when cut for leis, a rim of orange is left at top of each key used.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahalawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>watery, wet, tearful, weeping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>correction, criticism, complaint, reproach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young stage of kāhala fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bitter, soul, brackish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fail to hit, miss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>consideration of grievances, disputes; councils for such consideration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to buzz, whiz by, as in missing a mark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fail, err, miss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halakau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to perch high, as a bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halakau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, as a pregnant woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halakea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fair, light.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halakea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a yellowish tapa dyed with coconut oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halakeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporary support or prop in the middle of the house ridgepole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go off course, miss the way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high heavens, atmosphere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halalē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slurp, as soup; to eat noisily; to swish, as the sea; to spill or slop over; fat; not clear, as speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halalī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>far away and small.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halalū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of the akule, a fish, about 14 or 15 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halalū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, in poor health.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halalū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to rumble; 
   • to strum, as an ʻukulele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halawi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scrutinize.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halaʻai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>older name for hala kahiki, pineapple. lit., edible hala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halaʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sin of eating forbidden vegetable or fruit; failure to offer essence of such food to the gods before consuming it; to commit such offense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halaʻoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to project, extend; 
   • to appear dimly, as in a vision; 
   • to see dimly. 
   • fig., presumptuous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halaʻuhaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably the same as the weed ʻuhaloa, a plant form of the pig god Kamapuaʻa, mentioned repeatedly in an 1851 version of the legend of Kamapuaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sin, vice, to sin (Kanl. 9.21) ,
   • offense, 
   • fault, 
   • error;  err.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the pandanus or screw pine (Pandanus odoratissimus), native from southern Asia east to Hawaiʻi, growing at low altitudes, both cultivated and wild. It is a tree with many branches, which are tipped with spiral tufts of long narrow, spine-edged leaves; its base is supported by a clump of slanting aerial roots. The pineapple-shaped fruits are borne on female trees whereas the spikes of fragrant, pollenbearing flowers are borne separately on male trees. Many uses: leaves (lau hala) for mats, baskets, hats; the yellow to red fruit sections for leis, brushes; male flowers to scent tapa, their leaflike bracts to plait mats (see hīnano). (Neal 51) The aerial root (uleule) tip is a good source of vitamin B and cooked in ti leaves was used medicinally, although unpleasant tasting. The tree is called pū hala. The hala lei is much liked today but formerly was not worn on important ventures because hala also means failure. For the same reason some persons will not compose songs about hala. Types of hala are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ahuwaiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warehouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale aikāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a close family friend, house with friends.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief's house, royal residence, palace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale aupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>capitol building, government building.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>workshop, factory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hana hao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ironworks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hana pia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brewery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hana uila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>powerhouse. lit., electricity-making house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hana ʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tannery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house built with posts and thatch sticks of hau wood and thatch tied with hau cord; said to be used for healing the sick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>icehouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale heiau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house for keeping images and for worship; house in a heiau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale holoholona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻokamakama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house of prostitution, brothel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻokipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>guest house, lodging house, inn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻokolokolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>court house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻokomo kini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cannery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻolako kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻolewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>funeral parlor, undertaker's establishment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻoluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house of bondage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻolulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>railway depot or terminal, waiting station.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻolulu kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bus station or terminal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻolulu kaʻaahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>train station or terminal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻolulu mokulele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>airport.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻoluʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dyehouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻoluʻu ʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tannery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻomaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resthouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻomalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quarantine house or station.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻonā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>building where land claims were adjudicated by the Board of Commissioners to Quiet Land Titles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻoponopono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>administrative building.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻoulu mea kanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greenhouse, conservatory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻāhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warehouse, storehouse, shed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hoʻāhu puke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>library.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hālāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>meetinghouse, synagogue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hōʻaiʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pawnshop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hōʻaiʻē kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>credit union. lit., house for loaning money.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale hōʻikeʻike iʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aquarium.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale imu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shelter for the ground oven; cookhouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale inu kope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coffeehouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale inu kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>teahouse, teashop. lit., tea- (Eng.) drinking house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale inu lama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>saloon, tavern, bar. lit., rumdrinking house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale inu pia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beer parlor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ipukukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lighthouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kahu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house of a pastor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fort, fortification; tower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carriage, chariot. (Puk. 14.7) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale keaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>theater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portico; veranda with pillars; porch of pillars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kiaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>watchtower, tower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>observatory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kilo hōkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star observatory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kinai ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire station.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kipa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>guesthouse, lodginghouse, inn (Puk. 4.24) , house of hospitality.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kipa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hospitable friend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armory, barracks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>log cabin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house where tapa was made.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kuke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>customhouse, cookhouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house for beating tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kupapaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tomb, sepulcher (1-Nal. 13.22) , grave; undertaking parlor. lit., corpse house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kuʻi hao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blacksmith shop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kāhiko kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kāhumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cookhouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kāmala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporary shed, booth, shelter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kāpiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lean-to shelter; house without walls. This name may be qualified by the terms ʻalaneo, auolo, hālau, kāmala, kele, kōlea, Oʻahu a Lua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kāpiʻo ʻili lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rude hut made of bent branches or uprights covered with bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kāwili lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pharmacy, drug store.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kūʻai lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothing store, dry goods store.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kūʻai lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drugstore, pharmacy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kūʻai mea ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grocery store.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kūʻai palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bakery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale kūʻai puke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bookstore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house built of lama wood, completed during daylight (lama) hours and used for treating sick chiefs and for convalescence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>floating house, ark, houseboat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lanalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house built on a double canoe, as for chiefs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lapaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hospital.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lau hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taboo sleeping house for chief and chiefess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house thatched with leaves rather than with pili grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hale lama; taboo house for training kahuna hāhā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale laʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temple, house dedicated to God.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mud house, adobe house; dirty house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stable, barn. lit., horse house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outhouse. lit., small house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloth house, tent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lole holoholona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slaughterhouse. lit., house for skinning animals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cave house; house or vault over a grave; grave (1-Sam. 2.6) ; outhouse. lit., pit house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lua liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outhouse. lit., house with little pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lālā lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house made of branches, booth (Oihk. 23.42) , shanty. lit., tree-branch house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden or frame building.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale malu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shaded house, shed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale malumalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shaded house, shed
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale mana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>largest house in a luakini temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale mana hoʻokō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>administrative building.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house belonging to the high chief where he held secret conferences with the kālaimoku. lit., temporary house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>birdhouse, aviary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale maʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hospital.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale moa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chicken house. chicken coop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sleeping house, dormitory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale mōneka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>monastery. lit., monk (Eng.). house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale nauā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a place where genealogy was scanned to see whether applicants were related to the high chief and therefore eligible to become members of the royal household...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale noa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house without taboo, where the family mingled and slept.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dwelling house, residence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale o Lono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house where prayers to Lono were offered, as for rain and good crops; on all the islands heiau were so named. see (PN 38).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale o Papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house of the goddess Papa, i.e., house where religious services were held for women, said to be outside the heiau walls.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale olo papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sawmill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drum house, especially in a heiau where prayers were uttered (Malo 162); a place of refuge in time of war (AP).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pale hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snowshed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale papaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>storehouse (Kin. 41.56) . lit., secure house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale papaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apartment building.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale paʻahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>workshop, tool house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale paʻahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jail, prison.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale paʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>publishing house, print shop, printing establishment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>belfry. lit., bell (Eng.) house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pepehi holoholona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slaughterhouse. lit., house for killing animals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale peʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>menstrual house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house thatched with pili grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pipipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house for convalescence; small, low house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale piʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of ancient house, probably same as hale kāpiʻo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale poki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shrine where bones of dead chiefs were kept, as the Hale-o-Keawe at Kona, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale poʻo ʻoihana aupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>capitol. lit., head house for government business.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pua niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house where offerings of bananas, coconuts, and kava were kept, said to be offered in ceremonies deifying a deceased person or making him into a lizard god. lit., coconut-blossom house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale puhi kō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar mill; boiling of a sugar mill. lit., cane cooking house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale puhi palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bakery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale puna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house built of limestone or coral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pupupu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>makeshift or temporary house, shed, shelter, lodge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale puʻuone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporary booth, as in a luakini temple enclosure (Malo 163), probably used for divinations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pākuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tower (Kin. 11.4) , 
   • fortified house; 
   • addition to a house, annex.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pōhue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>storehouse for gourds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale pūkaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fort, tower, castle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warehouse, storehouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale umu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oven house, cookhouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prison, jail. lit., house [for] retention.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale weuweu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grass house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale wili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mill. lit., turning house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale wili kō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar mill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale wili palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flour mill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale wili papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>planing mill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻahaʻaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>restaurant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻauamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>palanquin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house where taxes are paid; tax building.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻauʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bathhouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻopeʻope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house for keeping chief's clothes and possessions; house for keeping bones of chiefs. lit., bundle house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻuʻuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small house, cottage, cabin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻāmala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blacksmith shop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale ʻāpulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haleakaiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pōniu and ʻinalua, the balloon vine. lit., house of the fish, so called because the vine was used in making small fish basket traps. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halehaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollyhock (Althaea rosea), introduced.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halehale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• high, towering, as a housetop, cliff, or waves; 
   • cavernous. 
   • fig., emptiness, hunger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halekoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house where the hoa aliʻi, chief's companions, slept; house where prisoners were held until sacrificed. lit., blood house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halekuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>building with many stories, tower. lit., added house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halelewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tent, portable house, tabernacle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haleloke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of lavender or purplish-red chrysanthemum. Probably lit., rose house, and named for someone called Rose, or whose house was called Hale Loke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haleluia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hallelujah.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halelū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>psalm, in the Bible; to sing psalms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halepā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cupboard, safe. lit., dish house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haleʻoihana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shop, workshop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haleʻuwī waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dairy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>host, hospitable person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name listed by Brigham for a pāwehe mat pattern; there is a central large lozenge with an enclosed rectangular figure internally enhanced with red on alternate weft crossings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hale₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry, fetch, bear (Nah. 10.17) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hali hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry from place to place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hali ukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry baggage; porter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halihali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to transport, transmit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haliʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sudden remembrance, memory, especially of a loved one; 
   • fond recollection; to recall, recollect fondly.
   • premonition;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haloke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loose-fitting, not tight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halolani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move quietly, as a soaring bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fins between gill plate and ventral fin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• motion of the fins or hands in swimming; 
   • motion of rubbing; 
   • to rub, polish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>harrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haluhalu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to breathe heavily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haluku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to clatter, bang, thud, rattle, plop; 
   • to strike the side of the canoe with the paddle
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haluku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to wallow, as a hog; 
   • to render turbid [obscure, muddied].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haluku₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crowd, rush; crowded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to roar, thunder; roar explosion, loud noise, racket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>halāliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, vigorous, large, of the Lahaina type, perhaps named for Halāliʻi, Niʻihau, where a famous sugar cane once grew in the sand dunes. This cane was used in ceremonies for remission of sins (uku hala, wehe hala). Also pakaiea. See saying, kō₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamakuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tie the hair in a topknot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamapaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>humbug; to humbug.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hame₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the two native species of Antidesma, medium-sized trees with hard wood, in the euphorbia family; leaves more or less ovate, fruits in grapelike clusters, purple, one-seeded. Formerly the wood was used for anvils for preparing olonā fiber, the fruit to color tapa red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hame₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ham.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamo puna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whitewash, plaster; to plaster; one who plasters, bricklayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamoʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ribbed tapa; to stain or dye with red, as tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• anointed, smeared; to anoint, stain, rub, as with oil; to besmear, plaster, to spread, as butter;
   • stroke gently, pet, fondle, caress; 
   • to struggle, as a drowning man; 
   • to put on, as gloves (Kel. 134);  
   • to plane smooth. 
   • fig., to flatter; 
   • compassion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thrust through or split asunder, as with a spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whisper, murmur, hum; whispering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamuʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>personal attendant of a chief, as a taster. lit., rind consumer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to eat voraciously, devour, eat scraps; 
   • fragments, scraps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hamu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to destroy; to consume, as by fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana aloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>love magic; to practice love magic. There follows a pule hana aloha, prayer to evoke love:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana hemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to loosen, let go.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do wrong, err.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do again, repeat, renew, repair, mend; encore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana hoʻohala manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hobby, pastime.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana hoʻohanohano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremony, ritual.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana hoʻohiwahiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>celebration to honor someone or something.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana hoʻonanea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pleasant pastime, hobby, avocation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana ikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard or strenuous labor or activity; to do such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana kalakalai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trifling, inconsequential action, as a casual love affair. lit., carving act.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana kamaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>childishness; childish; so easy that a child can do it.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana keaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act in the theater; show business; a play...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana kolohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mischief, trick; to do mischief, misbehave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana kuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noise, hubbub, cacophony; noisy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana kīwila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>civil service.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dirty work; to do dirty work; 
   • excrement; to excrete.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handmade, manual; manual labor; to work with the hands. crafting (HE).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana luhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiresome activity or work, bother, toil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana make</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thing of destruction, as a weapon of sorcery; to kill, destroy; deathly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana mana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>miracle, supernatural deed, witchcraft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana mau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>customary activity; to work constantly, diligent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana maʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>customary or usual activity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana maʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sexual intercourse; to perform such. lit., genital activity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana mua ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second hand, done before.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana noʻeau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>art.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>difficult, hard, laborious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana paʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make secure, fasten, shut up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana paʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steady employment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to work with cattle, especially as a cowboy; such work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana punahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>favorite pastime, hobby.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana walea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do with ease, as of long custom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana wale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to work aimlessly, gratuitously, to no avail, uselessly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana wale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tease, annoy needlessly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana ʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tanner; to tan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana ʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to sharpen; 
   • cutlery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>willful, disobedient.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanahanai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edge of a precipice or slope, brow of a hill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanahana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hot, warm, vehement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanahana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sour, stinking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanahihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rank-growing, wild, branchy. fig., untamed, uncivil, crude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feeding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanakapahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smallpox (perhaps short for hana i ka pahu, build the coffin).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanalei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hurled forth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hungry, hunger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>occasion, event, occurrence, incident, time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hananuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short, plump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanapēpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bruise, crush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• generation; 
   • relative whose relationship was established several generations previously; 
   • ancestry, birth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanawai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irrigation; to irrigate, water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanawai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>menstruation; to menstruate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanawai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>urine; to urinate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanaʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• serious about what one does; 
   • to consummate, as a love affair.   
lit., to do truly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• worthless;    • provoked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hahana, warm. cf:
   hahana, heat, warmth; warm, sultry, hot
   hoʻohahana, to create heat; to rouse to fury
   mahana, warmth, heat, warm...
   hoʻomahana, to warm, create warmth, heat
   pumahana, var. of pumehana, warmth, affection...
   hoʻopumahana, var. of hoʻopumehana
   hanahana, hot, warm, vehement
   māhanahana, lukewarm...
   hoʻomāhanahana, to make warm, heat...
   kōhanahana, warm, hot
   mehana, var. of mahana, warmth...
   ola mehana, mesolithic, mid-temperature loving...
   kukui hoʻomehana, heating lamp
   pumehana, warm, warm-hearted; warmth, affection
   kapuahi hoʻopumehana, fireplace
   koʻehana, warmth, heat; warm
   imu hau hana, oven in which hau wood was heated
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hana₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>notch, as in a tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haneoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong blow, as of the fist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hane₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ghostly, soft, and indistinct sounding. cf. ʻuhane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hane₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to give life and spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanile</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prepare for or receive company.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellow sarong, as dyed with turmeric.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to overflow, spill, pour out, slop over; 
   • to pour down, as rain; 
   • to disappear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to step or move lightly or softly; 
   • to graze, touch; 
   • soft, light. 
   • fig., to hint, suggest, act coy or flirtatious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hani₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to know well.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hano hāweo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distinguished, honored...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hano paka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tobacco box or container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fermented.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanoalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporary altar where offerings were made to the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to determine by lot the virtue or value of a thing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanopilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hoarse, wheezy, weak-voiced.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hano₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hoarse; humming sound of chanting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hano₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nose flute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hano₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>enema, syringe; to inject, use as a syringe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hano₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish net, as for mālolo fish or ʻiao; bag net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hano₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container, as for water or tobacco.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to breathe, breath, respiration, transpiration, 
   • smell, sniff, inhale; 
   • last breath of life; 
   • vanity. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanu nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanu pau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>last breath or gasp; to give the last breath, as of one dying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanu paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a head cold; stifled breathing; to have such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanu pilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bad breath, halitosis; to have such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanu pī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sniffle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steep, bent-over, stooped, round-shouldered; stooping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanupaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., fragrant breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanupau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a disease, perhaps pneumonia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanuāpuaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to breathe like a pig; to gasp for breath, as a strangled pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flow in spurts, ebb, fluctuate; fluctuation, ebb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hanuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short, stunted, thick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao hakahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grate, grill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao hou puka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>metal punch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao hoʻopaʻa wahie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>andiron. lit., iron for holding fuel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao hoʻpaʻa lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manacle. lit., hand-binding iron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao kaula waha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bit of a bridle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao keʻehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stirrups.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao kuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>branding iron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao kuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piston.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao manamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grate, grill, gridiron, lit., branched iron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao mākēneki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>magnet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao waha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bit of a bridle. lit., mouth iron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao wili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wrench.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haoa puhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gorge used for catching eels: when the eel took the baited stick it was pulled by a string, and lodged in the throat of the eel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scorching, bitter; heartburn, sour stomach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haoa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Also laoa, laʻoa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scooping; handful. (Probably hao₃ + -hana, nominalizer.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haohao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft meat that can be scooped from young coconuts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haokanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seedbed; to prepare a seedbed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haokea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rather common native variety of taro; the leaves are narrow, the piko, leaf attachment, light, and petioles light green. This taro supplies some gray commercial poi and lūʻau greens. It was formerly used both medicinally and in religious ceremonies, as for dedicating new fish nets. According to (HP 17), it is a domesticated form of wild ʻāweu. The name may be qualified by the colors hāʻulaʻula and keʻokeʻo. Var. names reported include ʻahakea, haʻakea, and hāʻawikea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haokila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be sturdy as steel. lit., iron steel (Eng.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haoma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handful, scoopful; receptacle, as a dipper for kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• rocky, as of broken lava or coral rubble; 
   • scraggly, uneven; 
   • choppy, as the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• iron, 
   • general name for metal tools, 
   • a bit; 
   • brand, as on a horse. 
   • See sayings, wela₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all native species of a genus of small trees (Rauvolfia) related to the maile and the hōlei, four or five narrow branches are borne together at joints of branches; many small, yellowish flowers develop, and then small, black, flattened, twinned, inverted, heart-shaped fruits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to come with force, as wind or rain;   •  to do with force and energy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horn, as of a goat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hao₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• pillage, plunder, loot; 
   • robber
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapa Kepanī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of part Japanese ancestry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapa haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>part-white person; of part-white blood; part white and part Hawaiian, as an individual or phenomenon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapa loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small portion, very few.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapa makahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>semiannual.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapahaneli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hundredth part, percentage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapahaneli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a copper penny issued by Kamehameha III in 1847.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapahapai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to toss up, as a child; 
   • to heave or breathe heavily; 
   • to glorify, praise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapahiku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one seventh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapahā kini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>five-dollar gold piece. lit., guinea (Eng.) quarter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carrying, lifting, carrier; pregnancy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapaipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavy breathing, as of one with asthma; to breathe heavily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapakolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>third; one third.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapakuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crooked, deformed, crippled, defective; speech impediment; to speak with an impediment, as one who has had a stroke; crippling, defection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapalima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fifth; one fifth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapalua kini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ten-dollar gold piece. lit., guinea (Eng.) half.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapaono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one sixth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapapū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>partly finished, incomplete, as work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapapūlima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>signature, handwriting, autograph.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shellfish, Theodoxus vespertinus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapawalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one eighth; eighth part; a coin worth twelve and a half cents; a piece of silver money (Luka 15.8) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapaʻumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenth part, tithe; five cents, nickel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapaʻuʻuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>minority, small portion; less.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of mixed blood, person of mixed blood, as hapa Hawaiʻi, part Hawaiian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>A-minor in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapenūia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Happy New Year!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hape₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>incorrect, faulty, inaccurate; to break, transgress (Kep. 49).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hapuee</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau heheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau hele wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of hau hele shrub.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau hele ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic genus of small trees (Kokia, four species), in the hibiscus family. The leaves are leathery, round, with three to seven shallow lobes. The flowers are large and red, and have three broad bracts at the base.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau hele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shrub or herb (Abutilon grandifolium). Niʻihau. lit. traveling hau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau kaʻekaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of hau tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white snow, snow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau koʻiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of hard hau tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>five species of a native genus (Hibiscadelphus) of medium-sized trees, related to the hau; rare plants, with heart-shaped leaves and curved, red, yellow, and green flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau oheohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare variety of hau, a tree, with a straight trunk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau pūehuehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snowflake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau ʻō mālolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hau-stick handle of mālolo (flying fish) net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau ʻō ʻiao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hau wood handle attached to net used for ʻiao fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau-₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, unpleasant. cf.:
     hauʻeka, defiled, filthy, smutty...
     haukaʻe, stained, smeared, smudged, defaced, sordid...
     haumanumanu, irregular, dull; ugly.
     haumia, uncleanliness, filth, defilement, abomination... pollution
     hauna, unpleasant odor, as of spoiling fish or meat, or volcanic sulphur...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau-₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruler (nonproductive, mostly in proper names, such as in the common names Haulani and Haunani).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauaʻiliki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bitter, cold.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a blow, stripe; to whip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calcareous earth resembling chalk or plaster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhalakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tangled, snarled; untidy, confused.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lashing, as of adze to handle; to lash. (hau₃ + -hana, nominalizer)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhauhali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry to and from, as gossip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhaukoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swelling of the groin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cool, as food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhilikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to snarl, entangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tie, lash, bind; 
   • to saddle, as a horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauhole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slang term for haole, perhaps related to hole, to fidget, squirm; it might also be said of a drunk, over-persistent lover, or mischievous child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a word known only in the chant called Haui ka lani, (For. 6:368–410); according to Andrews (For. 6:368), an ancient, poetical name for hāʻule which he translates "fallen" but more probably hau, to strike + -i, transitivizer. A more accurate translation of the chant's title is "the chief is struck down."  A less plausible interpretation is hau i ka lani, offer to the royal chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>out (said in gambling).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukalalī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukalima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ice cream. lit., creamed (Eng.) ice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukalī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dressed in one's best.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukapila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hospital.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choppy, as the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukawewe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kawewe, 
   • to clatter, as dishes; 
   • to roar, as a sudden downpour...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stained, smeared, smudged, 
   • to besmirch, stain, smear; 
   • defaced, 
   • sordid; 
   • defiled, as taboo food cooked with common food; 
   • babbler (Oih. 17.18) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>floater, as on a fish net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pudding made of arrowroot starch and juice extracted from baked ti root.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pudding made of arrowroot starch, coconut cream, and sugar-cane juice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haukōhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>icecap, as at the Arctic.  lit., checked ice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haulalapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blaze, scorch, sear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haulana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>iceberg, floating ice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haulani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to surge, as the sea; 
   • to plunge, as a canoe; 
   • to ply back and forth; 
   • restless, constantly on the move. 
   • to repeatedly travel speedily, as a boat or train...
   • fig., to dissipate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>this word is used idiomatically with lele and hoʻolele, and may be related to mauli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauloliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>descendant, offspring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haumakaʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blurred eyes of a rat, said of very old persons; an aged person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haumalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quiet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haumekū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of stone used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haumia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uncleanliness, filth, defilement, abomination; defiled, indecent, obscene, vile, lewd, unclean (Oihk. 15.2) , contaminated, sordid. (hau-₁ + -mia, pas/imp)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• unpleasant odor, as of spoiling fish or meat, or volcanic sulphur; 
   • stench; tainted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haunaele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>panic, riot, roughhouse, brawl, tumult, commotion, confusion, hubbub.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haunama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a slightly offensive odor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft limestone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat heartily or voraciously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haupeʻepeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to play hide-and-seek; hide-and-seek.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haupoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soften the earth, as for planting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauwalaoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a confused, excited din; to sound thus. (The following words are confused at times: uluaoʻa, walaʻau, wanaoʻa.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauwalaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gabble, 
   • gossip, 
   • chatter, babble, 
   • hubbub, 
   • fuss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauwawā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>medley of simultaneous talking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauwene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cry, tease, nag, fret.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauʻeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>defiled, filthy, smutty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauʻeli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glauber salts, sulphate of soda.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa sarong dyed with ʻōlena.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauʻoki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• chilled to the bone, stiff with cold; 
   • frost, ice, cold; 
   • icy wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hauʻoki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a medicine made of hau bark for women in labor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lowland tree (Hibiscus tiliaceus), found in many warm countries, some spreading horizontally over the ground forming impenetrable thickets, and some trained on trellises. The leaves are rounded and heart-shaped, the flowers cup-shaped, with five large petals that change through the day from yellow to dull-red. Formerly the light, tough wood served for outriggers of canoes, the bast for rope, the sap and flowers for medicine. (Neal 559–60). Of the two varieties of hau, a rare erect one (hau oheohe) was grown for its bast and a creeping one (hau) was planted for wind-breaks. (HP 196)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hit, smite, beat, tap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lay before; to offer, as a sacrifice or prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a soft porous stone, as used for polishing calabashes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hau₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mother-of-pearl shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>defiled, unclean, filthy, daubed with excrement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hawahawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a taunt in a children's game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hawaiʻiloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a line for ulua fishing in 17 or more fathoms of water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hawewe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rumble, clatter, patter, as rain; rumbling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hawewe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pour down, as the sun; to vibrate, as heat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haīnana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk with animation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻa-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a prefix similar in meaning to the causative/simulative hoʻo-. 
   • before short vowels and glottal stop the form is usually hā-, as hāinu, to give to drink, and hāʻawe, to carry. 
   • before consonants, both haʻa- and hā- occur, as haʻalele and hākuʻi. 
   • before glottal stop plus a long vowel, ha- occurs, as haʻāpuka. 
   • for a few bases, derivatives with both haʻa- and hoʻo occur, as haʻakoʻo and hoʻokoʻo, which have the same meanings; with a few bases, meanings differ, as haʻalele and hoʻolele. 
   • a few bases with haʻa- may form another derivative with hoʻo-, as inu, hāinu, and hoʻohāinu; heo, haʻaheo, hoʻohaʻaheo. 
   • before colors the meaning is "-ish, somewhat," as hākea, haʻakea, hāʻeleʻele, hāuliuli. 
   • for clear understanding, delete haʻa- and look up the base.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻahui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>united.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻaiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bachelor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whitish, pale; pallor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• proud, haughty, snobbish, snooty, vain; 
   • rude, 
   • to scorn, scoff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakoaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>like the tropic bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakoi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>egotistic; egotism; proud; to brag, boast, show off.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakoi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to force, urge, insist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakoi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to practice onanism.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakokōhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bring out the natural grain of wood, as by careful use of oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>female kāhili-bearer for a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short, as a bantam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakualiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an officer who preceded a chief and his train and announced his rank and the object of his approach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakualiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a class of dwarfish people of great strength and valor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to struggle to right oneself, as a turtle turned over.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male kāhili-bearer for a chiefess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakuʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shift or ripple; to and fro, back and forth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakuʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kāhili-bearer for a chief or chiefess of the same sex.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakūlipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻokūlipo, dark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻakūlou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻokūlou, to bow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to produce leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalele loa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to abandon permanently or completely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalele loa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extremely, exceedingly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalele noho aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to abdicate a throne.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalele wale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to abandon for no reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalelea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>man sacrificed when cutting an ʻōhiʻa tree for an image.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻaliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to brag, boast; braggart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalilio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tight, taut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>far off, distant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to be darkened; 
   • to bow the head, as in grief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻaloku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻoloku; downpour; emotion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻaloʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bend over, as a heavy branch; to droop, as in sorrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻalulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to shake, quake, totter, tremble, quiver. 
   • nervous (NKE12)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻanapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sway, as in a dance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻanepu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻonepu, plump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻanoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻonoanoa, to free from taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻanopu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swell, surge, as the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻanoʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exaggerate, gush, boast, speak forcefully; to chant with emphasis and force on stressed syllables.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to boast, brag, exaggerate, gloat. (see nui and (2 Sam. 1.20) )
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻapapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>firm, tight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻapuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻopuʻu,
   • to heap up, collect in heaps; 
   • to frown; resentment...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻawale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>See pākiʻi haʻawale, a flatfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻawina hoʻi hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>review lesson. lit., lesson going backward.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻawina hoʻomau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>life pension.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻawina hōʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>examination, test. lit. showing lesson.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻawina ʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the gift of second sight, a gift or knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻaʻwina hoʻohanohano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honorarium.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• low; 
   • dwarf; 
   • man or animal of short stature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a dance with bent knees; 
   • dancing (1 Sam. 18.6) ; 
   • called hula after mid 1800s.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a short variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yearning, longing; to yearn. rare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi aʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sermon, lecture, instructive discourse; to give advice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi kūpuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell of ancestors; a chant concerning ancestors, genealogy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi liki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to boast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi manawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell of the times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to state an opinion, testify.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi ola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to preach salvation or eternal life; one who so preaches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi pōkole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak or report briefly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi waha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>word-of-mouth, verbal, oral; to tell verbally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi wale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>easily broken, brittle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi wale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell without reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi wale₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flirt readily, with little reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi ʻale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break, of billows. fig., to surge, of emotion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi ʻano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to describe, tell the nature of.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi ʻeuanelio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to preach the gospel; evangelist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unbreakable, inflexible, stubborn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi ʻōuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell omens, prognosticate, as by observing clouds; soothsayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻialiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a hard rock used for making adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻihana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>verb (old name).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻihaʻi iwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>by holding the shoulders, to make a person's bones crack audibly; a form of chiropractic; to do so; to break bones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻihaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of haʻi₁, to break or snap, as a stick; broken; fracture, joint, break...
   • brittle; 
   • limbering exercises, as for the hula; 
   • massage in chiropractic; 
   • quavering; 
   • breaking, rising and falling of the voice; 
   • a style of singing with a breaking voice; 
   • to break, as a law.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiinoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noun. lit., name telling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiinoa laulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common noun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiinoa pili kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proper noun. lit., noun referring to someone or place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻikūumauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a call to lift a canoe or to rally together in any work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻikū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the kāhili flower (Grevillea banksii), so named because first planted near the town of Haʻikū, Maui. Also kāhili, and ʻoka pua ʻulaʻula on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻikū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>haughty, conceited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻileʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell clearly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻilima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distance from the elbow to the end of the fingers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiloaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>answer to a problem, solution, key.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻilono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell the news, to spread a report.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻimanawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a thin, delicate white tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻimoeipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fascination, interest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina kekeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irregular verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina kuhikuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>directional adverbs, as mai, iho, aku, aʻe. lit., pointing adverbs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina kōkua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>helping or auxiliary verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina nalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breaking wave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitive verb, active verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina pili haʻiinoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>verbal adjective.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina pili iā haʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitive active verb. lit., verb referring to another person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina pili ʻia mai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitive passive verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina pili ʻole aku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intransitive verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina pule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>recitation of prayers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina ʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neuter or intransitive verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻinaleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adverb. lit., clarifying verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻinau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bend the head forward.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a breaking, as of a stick or law; a break.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>verb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻinole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to incite, encourage, stimulate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiwale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all native species of Cyrtandra, slender soft-wooded forest shrubs with white tubular flowers.  Sometimes called kanawao keʻokeʻo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiʻano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adjective.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>speech, address, lecture, sermon; to orate, preach, make a speech; speaker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻiʻōlelo hoʻoleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eulogistic speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break or snap, as a stick; broken; fracture, joint, break. (cf. haki, moku, nahā, wāhi.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edge, border (not used with the articles).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coquettish, flirtatious; to flirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sway, bend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻi₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• someone else, another person; 
   • another place, elsewhere (rare).   
(Not used with articles)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻohaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strange, puzzling, astonishing; astonished, puzzled, surprised; to wonder, marvel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻohaʻona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>astonishment, wonder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to long for, desire; to miss, whether desirable or not.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to snort (Ier. 8.16) , bray, puff; 
   • to chatter, as the teeth; 
   • to choke with sobs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻuhaʻuuwē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sob.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻuhaʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a refrain in dance songs, usually fast, and perhaps related to haʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻukeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to quiver, shiver
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻulena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a falling, dropping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻulili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shiver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻupā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open and shut, as scissors, jaws.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>haʻuōwī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hehipuahala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name associated with Poʻo-kū, Kauaʻi. lit., stepping upon pandanus flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Heleekela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the planet Uranus, formerly called Hershel for its discoverer, Sir William Hershel, in 1781.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Helene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Greek, Grecian, Greece.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Helepoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hereford.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Helepona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hebron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hem</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation used in surveying for hema, south.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hepela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hebrew.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Heʻenehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a misty rain observed off the coast of Hilo when nehu fish are running.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Heʻepālaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>he aha sananā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of scorn. What does it amount to? It's of no value. (Perhaps nanā is from he ʻahi kananā, a phrase describing a fierce fighter; cf. nanā.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hea inoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to give a name; to chant a name chant; to call a name in hospitable welcome; to call the roll; roll call; name chant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heahea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to call frequently and hospitably; 
   • to welcome; 
   • friendly, hospitable, genial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heahea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warm, tepid, insipid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heana kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>human carcass, human sacrifice, an insulting name for kauwā, outcasts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corpse, especially of one slain in battle; victim, human sacrifice; carcass (Mat. 24.28) , remains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calling, as in greeting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where fishermen set a basket fish trap, as for hīnālea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Exocarpus spp., native shrubs and small trees (sandalwood family), with more or less leafless, jointed branches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi name for kāwaʻu, a kind of Zanthoxylum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to call, name; to sing or recite a name chant; to give a name to.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>misty, clouded, smoky, obscure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bank, as of a river.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bleat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heepālaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>each of two posts at the back wall of the ancient house, visible at the door.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, indolent, drowsy; weariness following sexual gratification.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehehewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mistake by many.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of pāʻū, woman's skirt, sarong. (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reddish, bright, showy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• insane, raving mad, crazy, possessed; 
   • insanity, madness; 
   • lunatic, maniac.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a swaggering or swishing walk; swishing, as of a skirt; to whirl, swish, strut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heheʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to slide, 
   • sag, 
   • fade; 
   • landslide, avalanche; 
   • soft, watery, melting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heheʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>discharge, as of pus; fluid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stamp, tread, trample, pedal, step on; trampling. fig., to repudiate, deny, desecrate, loathe, break (as taboo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehi hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>misstep; to make a misstep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehi palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thresh wheat; threshing. lit., tread flour (Eng.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehi ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to step firmly, stamp; to make a misstep and come down hard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehihehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hiking (HE).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to break rules or taboos, 
   • disregard the rights of others, trample on their rights, 
   • trespass; trespassing, 
   • willful
   • violation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>footrest; any place on which to step or tread; a stepping, treading.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to uproot, dig up, 
   • put to flight, drive away, shoo,
   • evict.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young seedlings or plants, as for transplanting; sucker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a purge, as of water and juice of gourd stems used as an enema; to purge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremony to drive away evil influence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pile, as of rocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hehē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>burst of laughter, guffaw; to guffaw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hei kapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sacred place, as one where a priest stayed in seclusion to await a message from the gods, usually a small house on the heiau. (UL 74.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pre-Christian place of worship, shrine; some heiau were elaborately constructed stone platforms, others simple earth terraces. Many are preserved today. Several types are listed below. In (Isa. 15.2) , heiau is a high place of worship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau hoʻoulu iʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heiau where fish were offered to insure good fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau hoʻoulu ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heiau where offerings were made to insure rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau hoʻoulu ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heiau where first fruits were offered to insure further growth. lit., heiau for the increase of food crops.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau hoʻōla</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heiau for treating sick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau kālua ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heiau for stopping rain, or (less frequently) for bringing rain. One such heiau named Imukālua-ua (rain-baking oven) was in the Kaunakakai quadrangle, Molokaʻi; a land section in Puna, Hawaiʻi, also has this name. Rain in leaf packages is said to have been baked in an oven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau maʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small temporary heiau covered with tapa stained green (maʻo), used for the hoʻoulu ʻai ceremony to bring food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau poʻo kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heiau where human sacrifices were offered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiau waikaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a heiau used for services to bring success in war.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piece of hair, tooth, fingernail, small bone, or the like of a deceased beloved, kept and offered food in order to please the spirit of the deceased.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heihei kūkini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>footrace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heihei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hei₁, net, snare, stratagem, ruse...; hei₂, string figure, cat's cradle...;  hei₃, motion of hands and fingers, especially of the dying...; to festoon, drape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heihei₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enthrall, enchant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heiē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>helper or apprentice to a priest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• net, snare, to ensnare, entangle, catch in a net;
   • stratagem, ruse;  
   • to festoon with leis. see kāhei₁,₂; (Luka 5.4) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>string figure, cat's cradle; to make such. Many kinds are listed by (Dickey).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hei₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>motion of hands and fingers, especially of the dying, (Some persons did not make string figures, hei, at night because of the association of the figures with the motions of death.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hei₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• adept, deft; 
   • to absorb, as knowledge or skill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hei₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water oozing from a cliff and trickling down.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red, sore, inflamed, bleary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• anchor, stone anchor, to anchor, anchored
   • towline, tow
   • line for fastening boats;  make fast
   • warp
   • taut, stretched
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to come upon, happen, befall, strike.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekeheke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekekē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>best, greatest, foremost.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>top gourd in a hula gourd drum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heke₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feathered top of an ʻulīʻulī, hula rattle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heke₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nail, pin, rack, as for hanging objects in a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heke₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>triangular sail, topsail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heke₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shy, sensitive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekili pāmalō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thunder without rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thunder; to thunder. fig., passion, rage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hekili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helahela₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>widespread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hela₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redness of the eyelids; rawness, as of scraped skin; to be red or raw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hela₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread, as the arms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hela₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hula step: one foot is placed at about a 45-degree angle to the front and side, with the weight on the opposite hip and with that knee bent; the foot is then returned to the original position and the step is repeated with the other foot; to dance thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele au</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go drifting along.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go wrong, take the wrong path, go astray, err.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele honua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go suddenly, early, or for no apparent reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele honua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tie or bind beforehand, as in preparation for a journey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>younger brother or sister; descendant of a younger brother or sister; to go behind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele kauhale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go from house to house, gad.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele kikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go quickly, fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele kūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go by fits and starts, jerk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go or come far; to go with no hope of returning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to travel together, of two.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele malihini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go to a place for the first time or as a stranger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele mauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to travel in the mountains; mountain climber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele mua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go ahead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele mua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>da capo (musical term).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele mua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>older sibling, descendant of an older sibling, senior.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele pēlā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>get out! Go away!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go with, accompany.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go naked; to go without fixed purpose or far and wide; to go empty-handed; to go without recompense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele wiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quick step, quick time; to go fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to walk, go on foot, hike; pedestrian. (Hawaiian pidgin ‘walk feet’ is probably a loan translation.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helehele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut up, divide; divided; filled with ruts, as a road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helehelei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. and intensifier of helei₁,₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to straddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stretched sideways, as the mouth; 
   • pulled down, as an eyelid with a finger (these were signs of contempt); 
   • inflammatory disease of the eye with a drawing down of the lower lid. 
    See saying, maka helei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helekika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heretic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helekū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to walk upright, wade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>herald.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helelei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quick-bearing kind of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heleleʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• falling; 
   • scattered, as rain, tears, grain; 
   • crumbling, as the earth; 
   • dilapidated; 
   • to shed, as a dog's hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helemauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare native variety of dry-land taro, with dark purplish petioles and white corms; grown on Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>going.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heleuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone anchor, anchor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heleāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flow like water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to become ___, get ___; 
   • like, in a state of, similar 
   (frequently followed by ā).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• when, 
   • by the time that 
   (usually followed by ā).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>following other bases, imparting idea of 
   • everywhere, 
   • here and there, 
   • continuously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a relationship term.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tie, bind, lash, 
   • make fast; 
   • noose, snare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hele₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to divide, 
   • cut apart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heliokalope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>introduced, sweet-scented heliotrope (Heliotropium arborescens syn. H. corymbosum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helohelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rosy, as cheeks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move back and forth rapidly; jerky pushing or sawing motion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ramrod.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red, as ʻōhelo berries; rosy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu hanaʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>composite number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to recount; recount.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu hoʻolawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>subtrahend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu hoʻonui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>multiplier.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu hoʻonui ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>multiplicand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu hōʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abacus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu kamaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>children's arithmetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>census; to take a census.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>even number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu komo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>divisor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu komoʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>multiple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu kuala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rate of interest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prime number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double number; dual number, as in grammar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu naʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mental arithmetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large number; plural number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu nui kaʻawale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exclusive plural, as in Hawaiian grammar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu nui pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inclusive plural, as in Hawaiian grammar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count or recite in order or consecutively.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu paʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>odd number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu poʻokela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perfect number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu puka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quotient, in division.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu pā-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count by, as helu pālua, to count by twos; helu pākolu, to count by threes; helu pāʻumi, to count by tens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu pāloka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count ballots; election teller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu pāʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>counting game with chants; to play this game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>list of the nights of the moon in the old Hawaiian calendar; to count the nights.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inventory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scorekeeper; to keep score.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu ʻano hui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uneven totals, as ten bushels and three pecks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu ʻano like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>even numbers and totals, without fractions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu ʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whole number.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>factor, as in arithmetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluhana kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prime factor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluhelu hoʻoponopono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to proofread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluhelu kaʻahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take turns reading, read in turn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluhelu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scratch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>number, count, total sum, amount; grade or mark (evaluation).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluna papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grade or mark, as in school; number of a grade (class), enumeration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluʻekahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>best, "number one."
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heluʻekalekia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>church census.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arithmetic, score, reckoning, account; serial; volume (in a series); numbered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a few.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scratch the earth, as a hen; to dig with the fingers; to paw the earth, as an angry bull.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grumble, list offenses or complaints, especially about lack of gratitude or appreciation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>helē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priest's helper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hemahema₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>want, need, necessity; lacking, destitute (Oihk. 22.23) , needy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hemohemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>separation, loosening.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hemolele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perfect, faultless, flawless, holy, immaculate, saintly, pure in heart; complete; perfection, virtue, goodness, holiness; angel, person without fault.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hemolele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>without restraint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hemoʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faint, scanty, feeble, hungry, gasping, as of one near death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>