<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei ʻoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei with spirals of several colors, as the kīkā lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei ʻāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any lei worn on the shoulders, as maile; necktie, scarf, neckerchief. fig., beloved person, especially child or mate. lit., neck lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei ʻōpuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whale-tooth pendant that tapers down to a point, rather than being hook-shaped, as the lei palaoa; especially worn by Oʻahu chiefs. lit., bud lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leiau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient type of prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leihala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of eel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leihala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plaiting and tapa designs consisting of a series of inverted triangles, suggestive of a hala lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leihua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., fruit lei, so called because the flowers are round like a fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leikō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>let go. Usually used as follows...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leilei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wear a lei or leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spring, leap, bound; place to leap from.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leinekia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reindeer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leioa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall, thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leiohiʻiaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native tree (Pelea elliptica and related species), related to the mokihana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leiomano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weapon, a large shark tooth set in a piece of wood about 6.4 cm long, with a string loop for attaching to the finger (probably from lei o manō, a shark's lei).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leiowī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tuberculosis, consumption.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to leap, spring forward; 
   • fling, toss, 
   • to rise, as a cloud. (Nah. 10.11)  
Usually used with hoʻo-.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sticky, slimy, as mucus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leek (Allium porrum). (Neal 198), (Nah. 11.5) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lekema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jacinth (RSV), ligure (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lekeona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legion; a large number (Mar. 5.9, 15) ; used figuratively of one possessed by the devil or intoxicated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>come.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lady.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tape for dress trimming.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lekia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to covet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lekimana koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>regiment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lekue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>league.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lekuke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lettuce (Lactuca sativa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hapahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count by fours.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hapakolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count by threes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hapalima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count by fives.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hapalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count by twos.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hapaʻumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to count by tens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hauli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greatly shocked, astonished, moved, startled, frightened...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hoʻokau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>altar to place (hoʻokau) things on, as sacrifices, especially a temporary altar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele hoʻokau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peak, top of a peak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele kawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap feet first from a cliff into water without splashing or into (at Kaʻū) soft earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele koali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swing; to jump rope; swinging on a koali vine rope, an ancient sport.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele koaʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flight of tropic birds; to fly like a tropic bird. fig., sheer, steep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele koaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for kauā, outcasts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele koke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap suddenly, immediately. fig., short-tempered, excitable, quick to fight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an interval of a fifth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>completely severed, as a part of the body in fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele lua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an interval of a second in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele lua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap twice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele lupe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise and fall, as the forepart of canoe outrigger (lupe). fig., the rise and subsidence of emotion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pole vaulting; to pole vault.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele pahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap into water with a splash; as this was considered poor diving, the expression may refer figuratively to any poor performance; to leap and land with a thud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele pailani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to praise, exalt, extol extravagantly or excessively (stronger than pailani, to praise).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele pali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap or fall off a cliff; to practice the ancient sport of leaping from a precipice into water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele pio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run away in defeat; to avoid capture, as a thief. lit., to flee capture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele piʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fly or jump in a curve; to fly as a comet through the sky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jump carefully. fig., to live a happy life; to transact business justly; to rise rapidly to success.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele pā-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>singing intervals in music (pā is followed by a number).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele pīnaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run with a rope around a coconut tree, and when going very fast, to lift the feet off the ground. lit., repeated leaps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>windblown rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dispel darkness; to purify or cleanse, as in a religious ceremony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to purge, cleanse, purify with water of purification.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fly, jump, move of one's own accord or for no reason; in ancient prayers, to speed on, as a prayer to a god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele walo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loud, distant cry; to call loudly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele wawalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reverberate, as an echo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transferring at sea from canoe to canoe or canoe to surfboard for the sport of surfing to shore. lit., canoe leaping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele weluwelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>torn to shreds; broken up and scattered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele ʻaoʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap sideways; to shy, as a horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele ʻopu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dive feet first into water without making a splash. Also lele ā ʻopu. fig., unfavorable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele ʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak prematurely or before one is spoken to; to jump to conclusions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele ʻōʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap or plunge into water feet first. lit., piercing leap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer uttered by a priest as a chief drinks kava, so that the essence of the kava will fly (lele) to the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleaaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang, suspend, carry on the back, as a child or load.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light windblown rain or mist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• flying away in groups, as migratory birds; to fly thus; 
   • to sail, as a canoe fleet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a good thinker, planner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelehuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine windblown rain spray, dust, mist; to fall as fine rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleiona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shark-sucker, remora (Echeneidae spp.); it clings to large fish, such as swordfish, marlin, bonito, shark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleiona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fidgety, foolish, restless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of shark, possibly thresher, reported by Hyde (no data), perhaps the same as laukāhiʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelekepue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard volcanic rock, as used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelekē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of lele₁ to fly, jump, leap, hop, skip, swing...
   • to beat swiftly, as the heart; 
   • to frisk, hop about, romp, caper; 
   • inconstant, promiscuous; 
   • at intervals, here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelemu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a slowpoke; slow, sluggish, disinclined to get up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelemū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seize victims for sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trust completely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to apply oneself to, concentrate wholly on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toothed, sharp-pointed design, as in tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepinao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swing on a koali vine. lit., dragonfly leap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepinau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>game said to resemble kōnane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleponi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to die suddenly, as by stroke or accident.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepoʻipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pounce upon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dive headfirst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably another species of Padina, similar in appearance to ʻaʻalaʻula, a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepuni₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a musical interval of an octave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepuni₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game said to resemble kōnane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who jumps over a fence; to fence jump. fig., nonconformer; one who cannot be restrained, especially regarding the opposite sex; wanton; to hurdle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fly into a rage at the slightest provocation; to lose one's temper; hot-tempered. lit., jump [at a] drop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelepō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of night-flying (lelepō) mālolo, flying fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a fruitful tree (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelewaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shark listed by Kamakau, perhaps the friendly shark that was said to lean (kālele) on canoe outriggers for food and company.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hangers-on about a chief; parasitic persons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelewi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ornamental carved figurehead on a bowsprit; a canoe with such. (Malo text, chapter 34, section 35.) Pronunciation uncertain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>word said to describe sexual relations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spring or leap violently, as in an attack or fright; to rush violently, plunge. lit., to fly evil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excessive, very great. lit., excessive leap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleʻopuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap obliquely into the water from a height. same as lele pāhiʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leleʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a marine creature (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacrificial altar or stand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tall variety of wild banana (Musa xparadisiaca), formerly planted near the altar (lele). It was offered to the gods and used for love magic. Its essence was thought to fly (lele) to the gods. It was used (for weaning (cf. lele₈): the banana was placed near the child with appropriate prayers in order to obtain the god's consent for weaning. This banana was taboo to women.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₁₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₁₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>followed by hapa- + digit). To count by — (digit). see below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>contagious, as of disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind-blown, of the rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>separate, detached, as a leaf separated from a plant for ceremonials.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a detached part or lot of land belonging to one ʻili, but located in another ʻili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hula step: the dancer walks forward, lifting up the rear heel with each step, with slight inward movement; sometimes with the ʻuwehe step with each foot forward. This can also be done backwards; to dance thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an interval of music, the difference in pitch between two tones, always followed by a number from one to six, especially lele kolu, an interval of a third, as from C to E, or lele lima, an interval of a fifth. Minor intervals are followed by hapa, as lele kolu hapa, an interval of a minor third. Lele may also be followed by pā- and a number, to skip that number of notes. Lele in this sense also occurs as a verb, to sing thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to dry up, 
   • to have passed the menopause; 
   • to evaporate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lele₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shrink, as clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tongue (short for alelo, elelo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lelo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellowish, especially the hue imparted to a whaletooth pendant (lei palaoa) by smoking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lemi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lemon (Citrus limonia), lime (C. aurantifolia).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lemi wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of water lemon, sweet granadilla (Passiflora ligularis), a passion fruit with heart-shaped leaves; good-tasting fruits, 5 to 9 cm long, ovoid, orange to purplish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lemuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broken off short, as a pole; to start out to do something and not finish it.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lemukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who sits around doing nothing, a term of reproach; also said to refer to a woman who is sexually unattractive. lit., standing buttocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lemuʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rubbish scattered by flood rains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lemu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buttocks (politer than ʻōkole).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lemu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slow-moving, sluggish; lagging.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• yellow, yellowish; 
   • jaundice; 
   • bile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. name for the ʻōlena or turmeric plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lena₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stretch out, as to dry; 
   • to draw tight, as a belt; 
   • to sight or aim; 
   • to bend, as a bow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lena₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, idle, indolent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lenekila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lentils (Lens esculenta).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo hoʻonani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>song of praise, hymn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a low voice; to speak softly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high-pitched voice, falsetto.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male voice, bass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo kāne kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenor. lit., high male voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo kūpinaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>echo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo lelepuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a musical interlude of a full tone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>duet; to sing in twos; two voices.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo mana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>voice of authority.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo mele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>song tune; notes on the scale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loud voice; to speak loudly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deaf-mute, dumb person. lit., held voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo pili aku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>active voice, in grammar. lit., voice referring elsewhere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo pili ʻia mai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>passive voice. lit., voice referred to.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo uwō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bass or baritone notes or voice; roar, as of a lion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo waena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second treble, middle or alto voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soprano, soprano voice, feminine voice, falsetto.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo ʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sounds, as in a language. lit., separate speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leo ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uncomplaining, agreeable; considerate of feelings of others; giving generously; noiseless, speechless, silent.  lit., no voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leokani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vowel. lit., voiced sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leokanipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>consonant. lit., sound said together [so called because a consonant in Hawaiian is pronounced with a following vowel].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>song sung to an audience. see ex. below. lit., standing voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leokū pāhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quartet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leokū pākahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>solo. lit., single standing speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leokū pākolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trio. lit., triple standing speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leokū pālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>duet. lit., double standing speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leoleo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak loudly, angrily, vociferously; to wail, as for the dead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leoleoā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>speaking loudly; boisterous; to speak in a loud, noisy fashion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leopaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leopard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lose courage, give up (contraction of lele, to fly, and pahū, to thud).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepalepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang in fringes or tatters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flag, ensign, place marked by a flag, tapa cloth on end of a stick, as used to mark a taboo area. [triangular flag, as at used car lots, (NKE)]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hem. (Puk. 28.33.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepeamoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cockscomb (Celosia argentea var. cristata), an ornamental tropical herb, bearing flowers crowded either on narrow spikes, or in large, plumed clusters, or in odd-shaped, crested combs, the colors including white, yellow, pink, and purple. lit., comb like that of a chicken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>copper coin (RSV), mite (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepelepeamoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Selaginella arbusculla, small club mosses; used for leis, braided with rosebuds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepelepeohina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus); Kamehameha butterfly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepelepeohina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nudibranchia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepelepe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fringed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepelepe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wattles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepelepe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>labia minor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepelua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a turncoat; unfaithful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepeohina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red seaweed (Halymenia formosa) with flat blades bearing fringed and irregular margins, with a variety of colors ranging from red to yellow; common allusion to swirling in water resembling movement of pāʻū in dancing. Also called leheleheʻīlio, lepelepeohina, limupepeohina, pāʻūohiʻiaka.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepeulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>split or crack in wood, running with the grain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to twist, as the arm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hem or fringe, as of a garment; any loose attachment, as of torn cloth or torn flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rooster comb; turkey wattles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo hānai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirt; rubbish carried to a pit, as to a compost pit. lit., fed dirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo kuhue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of clay. lit., solidifying dirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo kāwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adobe; clay. lit., mixed earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo kīʻaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>potter's clay, clay vessel. lit., cup dirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo loʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taro-patch mud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo mānoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clay. lit., thick dirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo pohō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marshy ground, marsh, mire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night soil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo pōpolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pōpolo herb dirt, an uncomplimentary term for commoners.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ashes of certain woods mixed with water, as for medicine. lit., dark earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo ʻaeʻae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepo ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red earth. fig., people interrelated for generations (rare).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepohao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rust; rusty. lit., iron dirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepolepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, turbid; contaminated, as water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leponalo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a euphemism for kūkaenalo; wax; mole (anatomical); muslin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leponalo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepopaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard earth; constipation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepopele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>match, sulphur (euphemism for kūkaepele). lit., volcanic dirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hare. (Kanl. 14.7)  (1843 Bible).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lepupalika₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>republic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leuwī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe with extra wide weatherboard; forepoint of a canoe where the two ends of the two weatherboards come together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa hoʻomakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>space just above the surface of the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>highest stratum of the heavens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa lani lewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower atmosphere, just above the lewa hoʻomakua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa lilo loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outer space, highest atmosphere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa mawaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outer space.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa nuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>space in the heavens lower than the lewa lani; atmosphere reached by birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewaalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>part of a heiau temple where human sacrifices were offered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewaanuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably a part of the lananuʻu mamao turret.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewalewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oscillate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewalewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unconcealed penis of a boy, usually called maʻi lewalewa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewawalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run calling (probably a contraction of lele wawalo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sky, atmosphere, space, air, upper heavens; 
   • aerial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to float, dangle, swing, hang, oscillate; swinging, dangling, pendulous, afloat, unstable; 
   • limber-jointed, of admired hula dancers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>homeless vagabond, wanderer; landless, homeless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to know thoroughly, as a type of work; to be thoroughly familiar with, as a place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lewiakana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leviathan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻaleʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a prayer to Kū, Kāne, Lono, and the ʻaumākua (family gods).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joy, pleasure, happiness, merriment; sexual gratification, orgasm; pleasing, gay, delightful, happy, merry; delighted, pleased.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clearly, perfectly, thoroughly, successfully.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reem; wild ox (RSV), unicorn (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻolani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lofty, tall; chiefly height, rank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻoleʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>children's leaping game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lofty, tall, high.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro that cannot be eaten either cooked or as fresh poi without throat irritation. After fermentation, however, the poi is tasty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Likemona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Richmond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Likepona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lisbon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Limahuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Haʻena, Kauaʻi.  lit., turning hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Limaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>god of mirages.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Limukākanakaomahamoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke in lua fighting.) lit., man-striking moss of Mahamoku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Linepuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lynchburg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lio Kelaneke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Rio Grande.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Liolioiwawau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, and name for the southern sky. (Wawaʻu is a widely distributed Polynesian place name) see (PN 229).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lipekika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Leipzig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lipelia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Liberia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lipo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star in the southern skies, and hence sometimes the name for the southern sky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Liwapula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Liverpool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liaʻakimalala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rear admiral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihaliha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as liliha₁, 
   • nauseated, nauseating, of rich or fatty foods only; 
   • very rich, of fatty, oily food... 
   • fig., heartsick, as over a tragedy; 
   • revolted...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihaliha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many nits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nit, louse egg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dreadful, fearful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihi lou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tip of a barbless fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>confused, bewildered, unsuccessful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi hana lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handmade lace; crocheting; any handmade trimming, as of knitting, tatting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi kakahiaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hairy spurge (Euphorbia hirta).  Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi kui lauoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maltese or hairpin lace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi mōlina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lace edging.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi mōlina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>narrow band of red, as on a skirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyelashes, eyelid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crochet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihilihi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato (no data). This may be qualified by the term palu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• edge, 
   • rim, brim.
   • border, 
   • boundary, 
   • margins,  
   Also nihi. see nihi for PPN.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small quantity, particle, a little bit, minutia; slight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>right or interest in property.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>point of fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pearl-shell lure, as for ʻōpelu fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lihi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piece of land usually between two ahupuaʻa and of unestablished ownership.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choice, precious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liholiho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very hot, fiery, glowing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>liter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>like loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exactly alike, identical.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>like me</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>such as, according to, like.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>like pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>just the same, alike, similar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>like ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>various, all, different, not alike.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>like ʻā like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>equal, exactly alike.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liki pahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>iron hoop, barrel hoop. lit., barrel tightener.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ticket, receipt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rigging.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likini wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leggings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to boast, brag, exult; boaster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tighten, 
   • gird on; 
   • to pucker; 
   • stiff, as a limb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>astringent, as medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liki₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a substance or glaze, such as juice of ti roots, that prevents colors from fading or mixing, a mordant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liko lehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lehua bud; red lehua leaves as used for leis or medicine; such a lei, as made in the Kīlauea volcano area.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likolehua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likolehua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likoliko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fresh, young, oily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leaf bud; newly opened leaf; to bud; to put forth leaves. fig., a child or descendant, especially of a chief; youth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shining, glistening, as with dew; sparkling, glowing; burning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liko₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fat, fleshy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liko₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Tahitian banana (Musa troglodytarum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liko₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to burn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ligure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>likānia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>litany.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lila₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lyre, harp (Kin. 4.21) ; lyric.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lileiuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cleanse, as of sin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lile₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright, shiny, dazzling, sparkling
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lile₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in unison, as chanting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liliha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• nauseated, nauseating, of rich or fatty foods only; very rich, of fatty, oily food, as of the wolu, a fish. 
   • fig., heartsick, as over a tragedy; 
   • revolted, disgusted, as by a hideous crime; 
   • dreadful, fearful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liliha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many nits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilihua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prepared, supplied, outfitted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilikoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>passion fruit, purple water lemon, or purple granadilla (Passiflora edulis), an American vine with three-lobed leaves and edible dull-purple fruits about 5 cm long, growing wild in many forests of Hawaiʻi; said to be named after Lilikoʻi, Maui, where it was first grown. The yellow-fruited lilikoʻi (P. edulis f. flavicarpa), is similar but has yellow, better-tasting fruits; it is grown commercially in the Hawaiian Islands and used for desserts and beverages.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>linen, flax, linseed (Linum usitatissimum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilina puʻu mauʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grass linen. lit., grass-clump linen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilinoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine mist, rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liliwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native herb (Acaena exigua), growing in bogs, only on top of West Maui and Kauaʻi, the narrow, fernlike leaves forming a rosette.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny, dainty, fine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liliʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scorching, burning, smarting, as salt in a raw wound or pain in the eyes. (Queen Liliʻuokalani was said to have been so named because at the time of her birth her foster mother's aunt, Kīnaʻu, was suffering with pain in the eyes.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liliʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau name for pua kalaunu, crown flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jealous; highly sensitive to criticism; jealousy, envy; anger and mental anguish felt if one's loved ones are criticized.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blasted, as fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilo loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>completely engrossed, dedicated, absorbed; permanently lost, taken, or given; far.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilolilo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>openhanded, generous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilolilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break away again and again, as fish from a hook; to hover between life and death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>busy, absorbed, occupied, engaged, engrossed, devoted,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>expense, expenditure, outlay of money.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lilo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>far, distant, out of sight, completely, entirely (often follows a noun).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima heheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a thinning hand, of one whose poi thins and ferments quickly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima hema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>left hand; left-handed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima ikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong hand or arm; power, strength; to handle roughly, assault, ravish, use force; strong-arm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small hand; little finger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• assassin, murderer, shedder of blood, brute; 
   • bloody hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima kuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>index finger; in printing, an index or hand calling attention to a note. lit., pointing hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima kuhikuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hands of a clock. lit., pointing hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima kākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handwriting; hand to write with.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima lawelawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pilferer, filcher. lit., handling hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima lewalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>idler. lit., hanging hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grabber of other's property. lit., long arm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima miki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>index finger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>big hand; thumb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>third or ring finger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima pūhaʻuhaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>puffed sleeve, as sleeve gathered at shoulder and wrist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima ulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a green thumb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima ʻaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second finger. lit., eating finger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima ʻākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>right hand; right-handed; dependable helper, right-hand man.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lima ʻāpā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light-fingered, thieving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>labor, laborer, worker, employee; industrious, busy. staff (HE). cf. hana lima under lima₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(but some persons limit limalau cooperation to canoe and house building).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limalima pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who handles dirty matter. fig., an immoral wretch, as a pimp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limalima₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to handle, use the hands; 
   • to pilfer, filch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limalima₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limalima₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to massage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limalima₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer in which the priest gestured with his hands; the ceremony was called:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limameke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for lima ʻumeke, index finger, so called because poi was dipped from the bowl (ʻumeke) with it.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to attack violently, manhandle, assault, beat, roughhouse, administer a beating, take by force.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limawīwī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato. lit., thin hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tree moss or liverwort.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu alolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a limu, Potamogeton pectinatus (pronunciation not certain). Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu haea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lichen (Sterocaulon sp.), with erect, branching stalks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu holoāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fresh-water moss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu hāʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red seaweed (Martensia fragilis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu kaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of liverwort.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu kala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common, long, brown seaweeds (Sargassum echinocarpum), their stems covered with short branches, bearing rather stiff, twisted, more or less toothed, narrow leaves. Rarely eaten raw because of toughness (though edible); used in ceremonies to drive away sickness and to obtain forgiveness (see kala₁). May be qualified by the terms lau liʻiliʻi or lau nui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu kalawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one or more kinds of dark green, slippery fresh-water algae (usually Spirogyra spp.) consisting of rows of cylindrical cells in unbranched filaments, common to fresh-water rivulets, dripping places, and taro patches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu kau lāau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all tiny ferns (such as filmy ferns), lichens, liverworts, and mosses growing on trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu kele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>moss growing on trees in rain forests.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu kohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a soft, succulent, small seaweed (Asparagopsis taxiformis), with densely branched furry tops that are tan, pink, or dark red, arising from a creeping stem-like portion; one of the best-liked edible seaweeds, prepared in balls for market. Also limu koko and for some informants līpehe, līpehu, līpaʻakai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., blood seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu kākanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a soft, sometimes gelatinous blue-green alga (Nostoc commune) sometimes covering the ground in the wet season as small slippery balls, especially at Hanalei, Kauaʻi. lit., man-striking moss, so called because people are said to slip on it and fall. also limu kākanakaomanuʻakepa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu lana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>floating seaweed. fig., a drifter, vagabond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu loloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>several species of edible red seaweeds (Gelidium), cylindrical or flattened, more or less pinnately branched, texture firm and smooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu loloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of edible red seaweed (Pterocladia capillacea), like limu loloa₁ above but more finely divided.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu lūʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red seaweed (Porphyra sp.), growing in the winter on boulders in exposed places, with delicate, thin blades appearing in groups. Best known on Kauaʻi, but known on all the major islands. Also paheʻe₅ or pāheʻeheʻe₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu pae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>landed seaweed, said of a newcomer or in a bad sense of a drifter, vagabond, or kauā outcast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>limu salted for indefinite storage without refrigeration. On Maui, usually limu līpoa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overgrown or covered with moss, seaweed, or any limu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limumakeohāna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a coelenterate (Palythoa sp.) containing a toxin, reported as deadly poisonous at Hāna, Maui. Also limumakeo Muʻolea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limuʻahuʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an upland moss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tricky, deceiving, 
   • unstable 
   (said to be named for the octopus' ability to change its color, and its waving of a tentacle to and fro like the motion of a seaweed in water).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind gust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coil, curl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>limu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft coral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft; adhesive, sticky, clayey, gummy, tenacious; glutinous, as taro of poor quality.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ring, hoop, race track.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lineka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lynx.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>linohau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dressed to perfection, beautifully decorated, ornamented.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>linokaipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>linotype,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>linoleuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>linoleum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>linolino₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calm, unruffled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lino₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright, shiny, shining with splendor, dazzling, brilliant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lino₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to weave, twist, braid, tie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lino₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>linu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tight-fisted, ungenerous, heartless, ungracious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio heihei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>race horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio holo noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>saddle horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio huila māhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horse with a steam wheel, an old name for train.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio hulu ʻaeko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark-gray horse. lit., eagle feather horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>riding horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carriage horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>colt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio keʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stallion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio laho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stallion. lit., testicle horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio lawe ukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pack horse. lit., horse carry gear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>merry-go-round; horse on a merry-go-round; sawhorse; wooden horse, as used in quilting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio peki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pacing horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio poʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gelding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liona kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea lion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tight, taut, as a rope, or of hair or horse's ears pulled back tightly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lio₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rope tied to the bottom of a large bag net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>liberty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frankincense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipelala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>liberal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• adze, chisel; 
   • any sharp edge; 
   • sharp mountain ridge; 
   • sharp, tapering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipi hoehoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adze or chisel with broad, flat blade. lit., paddle-like chisel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipi kuke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adze or chisel with thin, tapering blade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipi kāhela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adze or chisel with concave blade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipilipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as lipi, 
   • adze, chisel; 
   • any sharp edge; 
   • sharp mountain ridge; 
   • sharp, 
   • tapering...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipine hoʻokani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tape, of a recorder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipine kikokiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>typewriter ribbon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipioma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small rounded adze or chisel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipo wao nahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gloom and darkness of a great forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lipo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• deep blue-black, as a cavern, the sea, or dense forest; 
   • dim, distant; 
   • grief
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lira</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lyre, harp (Kin. 4.21) ; lyric.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liuliu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prepared, ready; to make ready; preparations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liuā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dissolute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leakage, bilge water; to leak, of a canoe or ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liwele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>book.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻawahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kukui blossoms used as medicine, named for a woodland goddess. lit., female desire [or fear].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong desire; yearning, amorous; to wish for ardently, crave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fear, chills.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, tiny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for aliʻi, chief, being especially common after nā:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻoliʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright, dazzling, dazzled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻoliʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the sound made by the ʻaʻo bird; to call thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as liʻoliʻo₂, the sound made by the liʻo (ʻaʻo) bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻuliʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass much time; to spend much time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• twilight, dusk; 
   • mirage, hallucination.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slow, tardy, taking a long time; a long time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>well-salted, salty, seasoned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>liʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep, profound, as of skill or knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lohiʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pele's dream sweetheart fetched by Hiʻiakaikapoliopele from Kauai. In some accounts he is destroyed by Pele after reaching Kīlauea because of her jealousy at seeing him embrace Hiʻiaka. lit., tardy [he is an antihero] .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Loke ʻAilana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Rhode Island.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lokeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Rochester.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Loko Paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Salt Lake City.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Loma₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Rome; Roman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lonoikamakahiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the god of the annual fall harvest makahiki circuit of the islands when taxes were collected. He was symbolized by a tapa banner suspended on a mast with a tiny carving of a human head at the top.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lonoikamakahiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a younger son of Keawenuiaʻumi who became chief of Hawaiʻi Island and defeated the invading forces of Kamalālāwalu of Maui. He was also famous as a debater (hoʻopāpā) and mokomoko fighter. (HM 392-394), (For. 4:256-363), (RC 47-63).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lonoikaʻoualiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an image god taken by Laʻamaikahiki from Raʻiātea, Society Islands, to Wailua, Kauai. (HM 497) Upon the request of the demigod Māui he lengthened the night so that Māui might kill Peʻapeʻamakawalu (eight-eyed Peʻapeʻa). His taboos were the kapu lama (torch taboo) and the kapu loulu (loulu palm taboo). lit., Lono at the chiefly supremacy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lonokaʻeho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an eight-headed chief from Kahiki (afar) who pierced the cliff at Kānehoalani, Kualoa, Oʻahu, and severed Kahuku from Kahipa. He was killed by Kamapuaʻa, who called on his plant bodies to entangle the eight stone foreheads of Lonokaʻeho. (HM 205.) lit., Lono the stone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lonomakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a legendary fire guardian and the name of the makahiki image.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of the four great gods, the last to come from Kahiki, considered a god of clouds, winds, the sea, agriculture, and fertility. He had also the form of the pig man, Kamapuaʻa. He was the patron of the annual harvest makahiki festivals, and his image (Lonomakua) was carried on tax-collecting circuits of the main islands. Some fifty Lono gods were worshiped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lono₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the 28th day of the lunar month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lono₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to praise, extol, as a chief (poetic).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elongated garden plot, as for sweet potatoes (so used in 1848 land claims).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loaʻa … kāu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>You'll get what's coming to you (rude).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>as soon as.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head tax officer; government tax as contrasting with king's taxes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a district (And.) or large section of it, contrasting with poko.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skill, ingenuity, cleverness; expert, clever, ingenious, adept, deft, technical, skillful, dexterous, handy, skilled; skilled person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loea kālai aupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>statesman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loea kālaiʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>politician, politically expert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohaloha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cocoon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• drooping, wilting; 
   • hanging low, as a branch; 
   • beaten down, as by rain.
    fig., sullen, spiritless, depressed, unsociable, subordinate, inferior.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trimmings of corners and ridge of a thatched house; to put on these trimmings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loha₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loha₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a var. name for the kilu game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohe lau āhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hearsay, rumor
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohe pepeiao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hearsay; to hear of.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>audible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohelau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wall and gable plates in house.  see illus. 1, illus. 2, illus. 3
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohelau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exhausted, worn-out, dilapidated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohelohe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to listen carefully, eavesdrop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohelohe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>larvae of the dragonfly; this was used in hula ceremonies because lohe means to hear and obey. see puaʻalohelohe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohelohe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cocoon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hearing, obedience.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loheʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hearsay, gossip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>delay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lohiʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slow, retarded, backward, languid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look over critically; to look at as through searching for flaws, scrutinize.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loialike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>royalist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• rule, 
   • custom, 
   • manners, 
   • code, precept, law; 
   • principle, as of a political party.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>observation, scrutiny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loio hoʻokolokolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prosecutor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loio kalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>county attorney.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loio kuhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Attorney general.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, spindly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rod.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>log, Hebrew liquid measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke Hawaiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double pink rose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke hihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>climbing rose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke huihui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pinkish-white rose, very fragrant and growing in a cluster; possibly the Duchess of Brabant, still common.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke kūkaepele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sulphur rose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the common small red rose. It has been substituted for the pink rose, now rare, as the flower of Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>green rose (Rosa chinensis, f. viridiflora).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke pihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny buttonhole roses (Rosa chinensis var. minima).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke wai kāhuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of rose, red on the outside of the flower and pink in the center; used for hedges. lit., rose [with] changing color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lokeli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lottery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lokema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broom tree (RSV), juniper (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lokeokaluapele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pink rose growing in the Kīlauea area, Hawaiʻi, commonly called volcano rose.  lit., rose of the volcanic crater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rose; rosy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lokia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roan, as a horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko hāiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hardhearted, narrow-minded; tightfisted, parsimonious; such a person; ill will.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko iʻa kalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>combination fishpond and taro patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lagoon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko kuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>man-made salt-water pond. lit., artificial lake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko liʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salt pond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko liʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cross, embittered, sour in disposition; such a person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salt pond or lake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko ulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seedling bed. lit., inside growing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fresh-water pond or lake; fountain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>merciless, heartless, evil, malevolent, barbarous, cruel; such a person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko ʻume iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shore fishpond with lanes leading in and/or out of the pond, used for trapping fish and probably only on Molokaʻi. lit., small pond drawing in.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lokoloko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>puddles, small pools.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lokou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>word, logos
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>character, disposition, heart, feelings.
cf:
    loko hāiki, hardhearted, narrow-minded...
    loko ʻino, merciless, heartless, evil, malevolent...
    loko liʻu₂,  cross, embittered, sour in disposition...
    lokomaikaʻi, kind, humane, gracious, benevolent...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pond, lake, pool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mainland of the United States (noted in a chant dated 1860, State Archives).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in spite of, regardless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loko₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>by means of.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• downpour of rain; to pour, of rain; torrential. 
   • blowing of wind; to blow, as a gale; 
   • fig., to feel deep emotion, pain, sorrow; 
   • to weep profusely; 
   • intense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lola hoʻopalaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roller. lit. flattening roller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lola māhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steam roller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lola₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drooping, hanging downward; droopy, sluggish, lazy, idle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lola₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Asplenium acuminatum), with much-subdivided fronds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lola₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lola₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roller, rolling pin; to roll.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole holoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>laundry; soiled clothes ready to be washed, washing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole hāpai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>maternity dress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole komo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothes, garments. lit., clothes to put on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole lauoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sackcloth of hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soiled clothing, laundry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole moe pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nightgown. lit., night-sleeping clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole paikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marching garments, regalia, full regalia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole papamū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>checkered dress, especially gingham.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole pia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>laundry washed, starched, and dried but not ironed. lit., starch clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>laundry washed and dried but not starched or ironed. lit., water clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trousers, pants, panties, slacks. lit., leg clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wāwae loloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long trousers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wāwae moe pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pajamas. lit., trousers for night sleeping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wāwae pōkole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short trousers, shorts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wāwae pūhaʻuhaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bloomers. lit., puffed-up trousers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wāwae ʻekekeʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shorts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole wāwae ʻepane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overalls, coveralls. lit., apron trousers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole ʻauʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bathing suit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>worn smooth by friction, wear, or constant handling; turned inside out; weathered; skinned, flayed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolehau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>limping, lame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolelau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatching and trimming, of a house. lit., handle leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolelua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>changeable, fickle, unstable, inconstant, inconsistent, variable; turncoat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>limp, flexible, as cloth; inefficient, unproductive, idle, sterile, barren, faded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loleʻaeʻae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine cloth, gauze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to unfold, turn inside out, reverse;    • to strip or peel off, as bark;    • to skin, flay (Mika 3.3);     • to scalp;    • to handle, turn over with the hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lole₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>depigmentation, as of palm of hand or soles of feet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli kaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of loli, sea slug.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli kohola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of loli (Holothuria), black and cylindrical. lit., reef loli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of loli, perhaps Chirodota rigida. lit., blood loli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli lūʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of loli (Holothuria). lit., tarotops loli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli mākoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of loli, perhaps Chiridota rigida. lit., blood-red loli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of edible loli (Holothuria). lit., flower loli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli ʻano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>change of nature, as of words and their etymology.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loliloli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>changing, turning, changeable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loliloli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soggy, gummy, tough and watery, as overripe taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a change, alteration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skinny, thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea slug, sea cucumber, beche-de-mer, trepang (Holothuria spp.); for some people an ʻaumakua. see kūkaeloli and saying, ʻīloli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spotted, speckled, daubed; to color in spots, as tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo iwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bone marrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• embryonic sponge in a coconut; 
   • coconut sheath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brain. lit., head brain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe-launching ceremony; to perform the ceremony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loloaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flying gurnard, a fish (Dactyloptena orientalis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed, probably the same as limu loloa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolohe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to listen carefully, attentively, with good hearing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolohe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stubborn; hard to move, as a rock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slowpoke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolohuamea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variegated colors, as of the distant sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolohuā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who is jealous and constantly stirring up trouble; jealous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loloiāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wander, as one lost; to stray, dilly-dally; to digress and wander in speech; roundabout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolokaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizziness, with spinning head; dizzy. cf. niu lolokaʻa, pōniuniu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolokia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut stem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolokukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be raped, sexually molested or ravished; such a victim.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolokū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>midday. cf. kau ka lā i ka lolo under lolo₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolokū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>muscle on back of the head, probably the occipito-frontalis muscle; the nervous system.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lololo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intelligent, brilliant; deep thinking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lololo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tasty, rich, fat, as marrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolomū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsuccessful, unlucky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loloniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe hull made of coconut log.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolopaioea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall, spindly, thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolopili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a design used on Niʻihau mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolopio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to die calmly and easily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolopua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>zenith.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loloʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bleached, as a shell in the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• brains, 
   • bone marrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• religious ceremony at which the brain of the sacrificed animal was eaten (such ceremonies occurred at a canoe launching, start of journey, completion of instruction); 
   • to have completed the lolo ceremony, hence
   • expert, skilled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pithy, white sponge in a sprouting coconut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long slender pole placed above the second ridgepole of a house, functioning as a batten for the attachment of additional layers of thatch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first brew made from ti root.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolo₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>serves you right! I told you so!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lolōiele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dull. redup. of lōiele, sluggish, slow; slowness; to loiter, dillydally...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loma₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, indolent, slow, idle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lomilomi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of lomi to rub, press, squeeze, crush, mash fine, knead, massage...; masseur, masseuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>block of wood used to support a canoe out of water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>useless, vain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lona₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>straight, direct.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>longitude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lono honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hear surprising or sudden news.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonohiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cry to be carried, of an infant carried too much; to fret in a spoiled way to be carried. lit., hear carry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>on the back; backward.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonolau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large-sized gourd.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonolupe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a banner held up by two staffs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonomakaihe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>art of spear throwing, named for a god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonomea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native tree (Sapindus oahuensis), to 10 m high, with ovate leaves 10 by 20 and 5 by 13 cm; it is found only on Oʻahu and Kauaʻi. Kauaʻi. On Oʻahu it is called kaulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonopapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>news spread far and wide; news so well bruited that everyone has heard repeatedly; spread far, of news.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonopapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of an unknown disease or fever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonopūhā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>art of healing, especially of wounds, abscesses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonopūhā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a class of heiau, probably for healing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonoā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hearsay, rumor, gossip; to keep hearing, as rumor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>news, report, tidings, remembrance (Kanl. 32.26) , rumor (sometimes formerly preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheat, liar, rogue; to cheat, lie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lopi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lopi hoʻoholoholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>basting thread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lopi huluhulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>worsted thread, yarn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lopi humulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>embroidery thread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lopi kāholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>basting thread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lopine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>robin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lopu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>consecrated adze, as used in carving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to link or hook together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>finger-pulling contest: two players hook fingers and see who can keep his finger hooked the longest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulu hiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native fan palm (Pritchardia martii), with thick trunk to 1.9 m high. lit., dark loulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulu lelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fan palm (Pritchardia hillebrandii), with trunk to 6 m high. lit., yellowish loulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all species of native fan palms (Pritchardia).  Hats are plaited of its leaves bleached white. also noulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>umbrella, so called because the loulu palm leaf was formerly used as protection from rain or sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Alutera monoceros, a fish, perhaps so called because its greenish-white skin resembled the loulu palm; used in sorcery to cause death because the name contains the word lou, to hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loulu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of heiau said to be built for prevention of epidemics, famine, destruction; long rituals dedicating a temple including kauila nui, fetching of the ʻōhiʻa logs for images (haku ʻōhiʻa), kuili and hono rituals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>louulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>betrothal gift, as sent from one family to another.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hook; to hook, to fasten with a hook; to hook off, as with the lou pole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very long fruit-plucking pole, with short sticks lashed obliquely near the end for plucking, as for breadfruit; to pluck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lou₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pain in the side, stitch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lou₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buckle, clasp
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough jagged stone, either coral or lava; hence, hard, severe, as a taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>curve of a fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irrigated terrace, especially for taro, but also for rice; paddy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻi Pōʻalima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a 'Friday' taro patch, meaning one worked for the konohiki (supervisor), as Friday was the work day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻi paʻahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a 'prison' taro patch, meaning that if a tenant failed to pay for use of the land he was imprisoned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻiloʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pools of water; having many pools; taro patches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻiʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taro patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻohia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• possessed, 
   • overwhelmed, stricken; 
   • to befall, happen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to overhang, as a cliff; 
   • to bend over, as with grief or laughter; 
   • bent over, as a laden branch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻu pali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shelter formed by an overhanging cliff. (Malo text, chapter 33, section 3).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>loʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fern (Coniogramme pilosa) with leaves somewhat like those of the breadfruit tree (ʻulu) but the divisions narrower and deeper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luahoʻomoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, said to appear in the month of Hinaiaʻeleʻele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Hanalei, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luikiana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Louisiana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luikini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lewiston.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luikiwila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Louisville.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lukela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lutheran.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lukia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Russia, Russian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luna Kānāwai Kiʻekiʻe ā Kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Chief Justice
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luwele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Louvre.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luʻeluʻe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lua fighting stroke
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Luʻukia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>A legendary chiefess, sister of Kāwelu, daughter or wife of ʻOlopana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pit of fire; hell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua ahi hoʻomaʻemaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>purgatory. lit., cleansing fire pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua hoʻokiʻo wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cistern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua huna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hidden or secret cave or pit, as where bones of the dead were hidden.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua koʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adze quarry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua kupapaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tomb, grave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outhouse, toilet. lit., small pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua meki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep pit or cave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua pao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>burial cave. lit., cave pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua paʻahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dungeon. lit., jail pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>volcano, crater. lit., volcanic pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua puhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blowhole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua puhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eel hole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua pālolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clay pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua unu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>refuse pit in a heiau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua ʻeli waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>superior, incomparable, unequalled, second to none, unique, unsurpassed (similar to ana ʻole and launa ʻole).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua ʻōpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rubbish pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enjoy oneself.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>victim, as of wrath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fearful, mighty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outhouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pitfall, seduction, deception; to lead astray, seduce, deceive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luahoana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>halo or rainbow around sun or moon. lit., polished pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaiele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to live a dissipated life, reckless of health; to dissipate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaiele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swaying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luakaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• enjoyable, pleasant, as a place to which one is attached; 
   • to while away the time enjoyably.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luakele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cave for concealing. For roots cf. lua (pit) and hūnākele (to bury).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luakini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temple, church, cathedral, tabernacle; large heiau where ruling chiefs prayed and human sacrifices were offered; to perform temple work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luakālai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., hewn pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lualaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(lua- + -laʻi, transitivizer)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lualuaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to raise and chew the cud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lualua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uneven, full of holes, rough, bumpy, as a road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be at leisure, enjoy pleasant sorroundings and associates, live in comfort and ease, enjoy oneself, relax, be content. (see lua-, -na.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luana iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pause a moment; to enjoy oneself a little.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luanuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dressed out in tapa, as temple images in Lono's temple on important occasions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luapaʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>refuse pit in the luakini or temple enclosure. fig., any place of destruction, lit., damp pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luapō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grave. lit., night pit. midnight (ka hola luapō) (Hopita).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>well, cistern (Isa. 36.16) , pool, pond, reservoir.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pound poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many and colorful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻeli pōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quarry. lit., pit for diging stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• vomit; to vomit, retch, 
   • volcanic eruptions; erupt; 
   • to banish, expel, drive out, as people.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻi koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any kind of sickness with vomiting of blood; to vomit blood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻi pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>volcanic eruption, lava, sulphur, brimstone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disgusting, nauseating, sickening.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second person to fall in battle, the second victim.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻuhane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the inner corner of each eye, next to the nose; tear duct. lit., soul-pit, so called because it was believed that the soul leaves and enters the body of sleeping persons at this point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luaʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jester (For. 5:479); hilarity, sport; to laugh, jest, indulge in uproarious merriment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• two, second, secondary, twice, deuce, double; 
   • doubly, much, a great deal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>equal, likeness, duplicate copy, match.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>companion, mate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lua₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of dangerous hand-to-hand fighting in which the, fighters broke bones, dislocated bones at the joints, and inflicted severe pain by pressing on nerve centers. There was much leaping, and (rarely) quick turns of spears. Many of the techniques were secret. Lua holds were named (see fight). Lua experts were bodyguards to chiefs. see Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seasickness, nausea, dizziness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>easily scattered, dispersed, blown away; scaly, as skin. lit., scattered fine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of soft, porous stone that breaks easily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luelue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bag net with meshes the width of a finger, as held open by a hoop of walaheʻe wood and baited and lowered into the sea by tour long cords.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang down, overhang, sag, droop, wilt, wither.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luheluhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sag with fat, overhang.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhi hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tired without accomplishing anything; weary from efforts that bring no results.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of shark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhiehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beautiful, attractive, festooned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhiehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, cooked soft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a laboring, wearying, caring for, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• weary, tired, fatigued; wearisome, burdensome, tiresome, laborious, tedious; 
   • burden, wearisome or tedious task; 
   • labor, work, pains, toil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a child or other person tended and raised with devoted care; 
   • to care for and attend with care and affection; 
   • protégé.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sailor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rood, in surveying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lukaluka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa sarong, as worn by men.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lukapia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>root beer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lukau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lookout; to look out, be careful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lukipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lucifer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>massacre, slaughter, destruction; to massacre, destroy, slaughter, lay waste, devastate, exterminate, ravage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luku lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>doubly destroyed, said of opposing forces despairing of victory and by mutual consent stopping fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luku wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vandalism, useless slaughter or destruction; to destroy thus; massacre (eh)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lukuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>destruction, slaughter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lukānela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lieutenant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lula hoʻokeonimana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rules of gentlemanly conduct, etiquette.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lula kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fundamental or basic rule.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lula ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disorderly, unruly, without manners, uncouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• rules, manners, regulations,
   • ethics, etiquette.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruler, tape measure
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lule₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to quiver, as jello; 
   • to sag, as flesh of a fat person; 
   • weak, 
   • flexible
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lule₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of pili grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to shake, as the head in approval or disapproval; 
   • to pitch and roll, as a ship; 
   • to totter, be unsteady; 
   • to sway to and fro (Mat. 11.7) 
   • wag
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luliluli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agitated;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lulo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare word used to describe a fearless and physically perfect chief, used with napa and a negative. Pronunciation uncertain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luloni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sleep soundly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• calm, peace,  to be calm;
   • shelter, lee, 
   • protection, shield,  to shield.
   • cloak; 
   • to lie at anchor;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lulu aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>royal feather cloak (rare); chiefly protection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luluhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black and heavy, of clouds; overcast, threatening.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luluka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peace, calm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lululu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dead calm, great calm; becalmed; hanging limp, as a sail in a calm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lulumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crushed, crumpled, wrinkled...
   redup. of lumi₁:
   • to crowd uncomfortably;
   • to overturn, 
   • pound, crush, as the surf; 
   • to press...;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luluāʻina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>freckles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luluāʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pound ʻina and hāʻukeʻuke sea urchins as for bait.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luluʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as luʻuluʻu₁,  bent or bowed down, as with weight, sorrow, or trouble...; said also of a tree laden with fruit, a person laden with leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luma ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>capsized.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumahaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>certain twist of the fingers in making string figures, perhaps named for a place on Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumahaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rheumatism, arthritis, neuritis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to douse,
   • duck; 
   • to upset, 
   • tumble, 
   • capsize, as in the surf. 
   • fig., to destroy, overwhelm, as with trouble (luma + -a ʻi or -ʻi, transitivizers).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drowning, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi holoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>laundry room.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi hoʻoluana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lounge, reception room.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi hoʻāhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>storeroom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi hulahula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ballroom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi hāiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>narrow room, cell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi waiho pā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pantry. lit., room for leaving plates.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi waiho ukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>storeroom. lit., room to leave goods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi ʻauʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bathroom. lit., washing room.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumiʻaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dining room.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lumi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to crowd uncomfortably; 
   • to overturn, 
   • pound, crush, as the surf; 
   • to press; 
   • to be overwhelmed with trouble; 
   • to destroy by black magic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ana ʻāina nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surveyor general.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna aupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>government official.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna awa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>harbor master.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hale kiaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commander or chief guard of a fortress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overseer, foreman, anyone in charge of work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna haneli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>centurion.  lit., overseer of hundred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna haʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>confessor, as Catholic priest. lit., speaking superior.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna helu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>census taker. lit., counting supervisor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna helu kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>teller, as of a bank. lit., officer who counts money.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manager, administrative head, overseer. lit., supervisor to cause work to be done.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻokō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>executive officer. lit., officer who accomplishes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻokō kauoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>executor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻoluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taskmaster.  lit., officer who makes weary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻomalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chairman; speaker, as of the House of Representatives; presiding officer; comptroller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻonā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commissioner who settles land claims.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻoponopono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>editor, supervisor, administrator, director.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻoponopono waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>executor, as of an estate; trustee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hoʻopuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>publisher. lit., officer who makes appear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hōʻoia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>auditor. lit., proving officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna hōʻoiaʻiʻo palapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>certifier of title. lit., officer who certifies the truth of document.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kanalima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leader of fifty men.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>war officer, captain, commander.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kaukani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>officer in charge of a thousand or more men. lit., Officer of a thousand (Eng.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upper part of a pillar, chapiter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kiaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>supervisor; overseer of others; bishop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>military officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna koʻikoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ambassador; important officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>school superintendent, schoolmaster, school committee (old term).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kulanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>school superintendent (old term).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kākau kope o ke aupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>notary public. lit., officer who writes the government copy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>comptroller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kānāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>judge, magistrate; Book of Judges in the Old Testament; referee, as in a fight; judicial. lit., law officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kānāwai hoʻokōkauoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probate judge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kānāwai hoʻomalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>police justice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kānāwai kaʻapuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>circuit judge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kānāwai kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief justice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kānāwai kōkua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>associate justice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna kānāwai ʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>district judge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna lawe hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief servant, minister. lit., officer undertaking work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna lawelawe no ke kenelala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aide-de-camp. lit., officer serving for the general.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna leka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>postmaster. lit., letter officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna mele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chorister.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna mākaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>district sheriff, chief of police.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna mālama waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trustee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chairman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief officer or foreman, especially head overseer of a sugar plantation, superintendent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna nānā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inspector; judge, as in song contests.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna nānā helu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>auditor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna nānā koho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>election official.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna pai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>officer who called warriors to battle. lit., urging officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water master, one in charge of water distribution.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna wehe pilikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>representative in the old Hawaiian parliament. lit., officer who removes trouble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻae male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>officer who permits marriage (1851 term).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻahaʻaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toastmaster, director of a feast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>food inspector.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tax collector (Luka 7.34) , tax assessor, publican, master of tribute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻekalesia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alderman, lay church official.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head of a family; headman of a tribe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻohi kuke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>collector of customs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻānela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Archangel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna ʻāpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>censor, approving officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lunakahiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elder (Puk. 3.16) ; elderly leader.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lunamakaʻāinana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>representative in the legislature. lit., people's officer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lunawaemanaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conscience. lit., officer that selects thoughts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lunaʻikehala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conscience. lit., officer who knows wrong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lunaʻohi kālāʻauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tax collector.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lunaʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apostle; communication officer; proclaimer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luna₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief piece in the kōnane game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>limping, unsteady.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lunihini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perhaps a land shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupalupa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flourishing, of luxuriant growth, lush, thriving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupalupa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>purifying ceremonies of various sorts, as to insure growth or to cleanse contaminated persons, as those who have buried the dead; prayer for the soul of one who has just died; to conduct such ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pleasing, attractive, as plants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calomel and tartar emetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drunk, intoxicated; to distress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupeʻakeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian stormy petrel (Oceanodroma castro cryptoleucura).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kite. Four types of lupe were said to exist; 
   • lupe lā, a round kite, lit., sun kite; 
   • lupe mahina, kite with tapa covering cut in a crescent shape, lit., moon kite; 
   • lupe manu, kite with wings on the side, lit., bird kite; 
   • lupe maoli, kite suggestive of European kites in shape, lit., genuine kite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flattened end of the forward end of the outrigger float outside of the joining of the outrigger boom to the float.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lupo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wolf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large fishhook, as used for large fish or sometimes for bonito.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻaluʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aged,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old and wrinkled, worn and shabby with use, worn-out; sagging, hanging down, flimsy, soft, pliable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loose, as a garment; hanging loose, long and flowing; loosened.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻeluʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loose gown or robe, as of Biblical characters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>imaginary or indistinct sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to abolish, nullify.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who delivers a victim to the sacrificial altar; to so deliver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻu kimo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dive headfirst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻu poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dive headfirst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻu ʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tanner of skins and hides.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻukia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut fiber lashing; to lash thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻuluʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bent or bowed down, as with weight, sorrow, or trouble; 
   • painful, sorrowful, sad, wretched, woeful, bereaved, downcast, depressed, toilsome, overladen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>luʻuluʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to set a hīnaʻi, fish trap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lā Hoʻomaikaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Thanksgiving Day. lit., day to bless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lā Hoʻālohaloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Thanksgiving Day. lit., day for expression of affection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lā Kau Pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Decoration Day. lit., day to place flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lā Kāpaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sabbath Day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lā Lū Pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Decoration Day. lit., day to scatter flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lā ʻAi Pelehū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Thanksgiving Day. lit., turkey-eating day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lāhei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lākana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>London.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lākina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Latin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lālani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name for the Milky Way (Kep. 81), and also of a single star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lānaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lānaʻi Island. perhaps lit., day conquest. also Nānaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lānui o nā Limahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Labor Day. lit., holiday of the laborers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lāʻau Kū Kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eighteenth day of the lunar month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lāʻau Kū Lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nineteenth day of the lunar month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lāʻau Pau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twentieth day of the lunar month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lāʻieikawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the heroine of the romance of the same name called 'the masterpiece of Hawaiian romantic fiction' (HM 534). Lāʻie was hidden at birth in a pool at Lāʻie, Oahu, and later reared in a sacred house of yellow feathers at Paliuli, a mythical paradise on Hawaiʻi. ʻAiwohikupua of Kauaʻi vainly wooed her. She adopted his Maile sisters. They found her a god husband who lived in the sun — Kaʻōnohiokalā (the eyeball of the sun) — but he was unfaithful. Lāʻie was worshiped as ka wahine o ka liʻulā, the lady of the twilight. Using traditional motifs, Haleʻole (in (Laie)) wrote this long story in imitation of European romances. lit., ʻie leaf in the water. see Kaʻōnohiokalā; Maile; Waka.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lāʻie₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place name, windward Oʻahu. Mormon Temple and Brigham Young University-Hawaiʻi site.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā anoano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>person presiding over the game of kilu. lit., quiet day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>workday.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā hiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eastern sun, rising sun; eastern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā hoʻokahakaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>holiday on which everyone dresses up, enjoys sports, parties. lit., display day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā hoʻomalolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Day of preparation (Mat. 27.62) ; day before the taboo day, hence Saturday.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā hoʻomanaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Day of commemoration, anniversary day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā hoʻāno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Holy day, day of worship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā huikala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Day of purification ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>setting sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white fin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā kulāia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Day of celebration in honor of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā kōʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>days of labor required of tenants. Also kōʻele, lā paʻahao.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā maka kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>holiday; festive day on which people gathered for parties and celebrations. lit., day of people's faces.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā noa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weekday. lit., day without taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā paʻahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>days of labor required of tenants. Also kōʻele, lā kōʻele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā piha makahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>birthday.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā-₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for lau₁, leaf, frond... with k- of the following word omitted: lāʻalo for lau kalo, taro leaf; lāʻī for lau kī, ti leaf; lāʻō for lau kō, sugar-cane leaf. Also lāʻie for lau ʻie, lākī for lau kī.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā-₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>third person, in the dual and plural pronouns only, lāua and lākou.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to poise aloft, as a kite; hover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rare var. of lēhei, lēkei, to leap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short wing fence to guide cattle to a corral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vile-smelling; stench; one of unsavory reputation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cactus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhui hui pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>united nation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhui kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nation, people, tribe, multitude; mankind, humanity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nation, race, tribe, people, nationality; great company of people; species, as of animal or fish, breed; national, racial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to assemble, gather together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāhui₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prohibit, forbid, lay a taboo, proclaim a law (possibly -i is a transitivizer; cf.  and Samoan lafu, to prohibit).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lākana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lantana (Lantana camara), a thorny tropical American bush with variegated flower heads, yellow, orange, red, white, and pink. Eng. Also lanakana (Niʻihau), mikinolia hihiu, mikinolia hohono, mikinolia kukū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fair, white, of complexion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lākike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lattice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lākā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lascar [East Indian sailor].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lākī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti leaf (short for lau kī).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lākī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stunted, as of plants that have matured.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lākō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar-cane leaf (same as lāʻō, contraction of lau kō).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad. lit., broad surface.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālahalaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise and swell, of surf before it breaks; broad, as a surface.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, delicate. lit., thin surface.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>daring, fearless, clever, as of a climber of precipices or trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pilfer, meddle, grope, reach here and there; to be scattered here and there, as houses; pilfering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālani poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>curve, arc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seize, take hold of, grasp, reach out for, pick up, hold fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālau lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grab in the hands, tackle, manhandle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālau ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to snatch away or grab roughly or ruthlessly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālauahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray, stormy-looking, smoke-colored.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rotten, as of eggs; disturbed, addled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buoy, beacon; prominent object or landmark ashore to steer by.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster, bunch, as of bananas; assembled together, as flowers in a lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>detailed; to do detailed work, attend to small details.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālā kanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cutting (to plant).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whitetip shark (Pterolamiops longimanus), up to 4 m long. lit., white fins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālākoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>with strong limbs. lit., coral branch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālākukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prosperous, successful, well-to-do, rich.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>member, as of a society.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>term in fractions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slip, as of hibiscus. Also lālā hoʻoulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet potato produced on a branch vine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālā₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barb or hook, as of bone or coconut shell, on a mother-of-pearl lure; bone point of a composite hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lālā₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lānahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>charcoal, coal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lānahu pōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cinders.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lānaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lānia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to warm, toast, or wilt over a fire, as young pandanus leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lānihinihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, narrow. lit., edge surface.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāpaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rabbit, hare. cottontail (HE)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāpeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bent, crooked, doubled up; curled up, like the tail of a pig; coiled, flexed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāpuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bunched up, humped up, curled up; 
   • crooked, bent over, arched; 
   • head bent forward, as of a bucking horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāuaʻaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>counselor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāuli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark, overcast, shady; darkness. lit., dark sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāuli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ulua, a fish. lit., dark fin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāwalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish or meat bound in ti leaves for cooking; to cook thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻaeʻoia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>past days of youth, strength, beauty, prosperity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻahaʻaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mature taro tops too tough to eat, and good only for wrapping (contraction of lau kalo, taro leaf).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau Kalikimaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Christmas tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>children of chiefs by second matings; their children were termed laʻa uli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau ana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yardstick, ruler, surveying rod, measuring stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salve, ointment. lit., rubbing medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>switch, club.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>after endpiece of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻohanuhanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inhalant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻohiamoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drug, narcotic, soporific, medicine to cause sleep, chloroform.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻoikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tonic, any medicine that strengthens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻokani pahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drumstick. lit., drumplaying stick. cf. ʻuha moa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻokaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rolling pin, any wooden roller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻomake mū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insecticide. lit., medicine to kill insects.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻomalule kino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>narcotic, drug. lit., medicine to relax the body.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻomālielie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tranquilizer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻonahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cathartic medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻonoenoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drug, as opium. lit., befogging plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻopiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>emetic. lit., medicine to make come up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻopololei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>splint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻopā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>medicine to prevent fecundation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hoʻowali ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>implement for mixing poi or poi palaoa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hānō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>asthma medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hānō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Jimson weed (Datura stramonium), a cosmopolitan weed, related to nānāhonua (Brugmansia candida), a coarse annual herb with white or pale purple or blue trumpet-shaped flowers 5 to 10 cm long and spiny fruits about 5 cm long. The plant is strongly narcotic and poisonous. A drug called stramonium, extracted from dried leaves and flowering tops, is used to treat asthma.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau hū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any gum-producing tree or plant, as candlenut, spruce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau ihu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bow endpiece of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau iki ʻai ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edible herb. cf. (Roma 14.2) . lit., small eaten plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boom of a vessel. lit., turning stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kahi hā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one-by-four lumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kalakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lantana. lit., thorny plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• cypress (RSV), 
   • fir tree (KJV) (Zek. 11.2) ; 
   • terebinth (RSV), 
   • elm (KJV) (Hos. 4.13) ; 
   • conifer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau keʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden cross or crucifix; bar to hold a gate shut, brace, bolt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick for snaring birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kinipōpō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ball bat of any kind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>easel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kumu ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parasite. lit., plant without foundation. A legendary koa tree with this name at Kahikikolo, Kauaʻi, was said to have only branches and no trunk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ladder, tree with crosspieces used as a ladder. lit., joined wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kuʻi kope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coffee huller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kuʻi palu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden palu pestle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kāhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of faith healing of broken or crushed bones or sprains. lit., calling medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kāpalapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bamboo stamp for marking tapas. lit., printing stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bar to hold a gate shut, bolt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house post, post, doorpost; mast. lit., standing stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau kūpeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stocks, wooden fetters, handcuffs. lit., bracelet sticks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau lalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boom of a vessel. lit., down stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau lapaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>medicine. lit., curing medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small bush, plant, or stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau loke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rosewood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau lua hā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two-by-four lumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau lālau meaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chopsticks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau make</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poison.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau moekū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden bedstead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau mākaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>policeman's club.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau paepae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boom of a vessel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau pahupahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>billiard cue. lit., billiard stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau palupalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>herbs, tender vegetables.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau pauka makika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>punk for mosquitoes. lit., stick mosquito powder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau paʻi kinipōpō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ball bat, tennis racket, pingpong paddle; any kind of paddle for slapping a ball. lit., stick for beating ball.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a gambling game. lit., betting stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau pālau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fighting club.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau ʻaila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>castor-oil plant; lit., oil plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau ʻoʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bramble, briar, thorny tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau ʻōhikihiki niho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toothpick. lit., stick to pick teeth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻauʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chopsticks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻauʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fragrant wood, especially sandalwood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>medicine, medical.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lump or knot in the flesh, as eased by the rubbing kahi massage; to feel such a knot or stiffness; cramp. Charley horse; to have a cramp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>picture frame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for canoe endpiece.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻau₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nights of the moon beginning with Lāʻau, see:
     Lāʻau Kū Kahi - 18th day of the lunar month...
     Lāʻau Kū Lua - 19th day of the lunar month...
     Lāʻau Pau - 20th day of the lunar month...
see also  (Malo Ch. 12: Divisions of the year, 30-36).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• old leaf, ready to fall or beginning to dry (a contraction of lau ʻelemakule, old leaf). 
   • fig., aged; old age.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻie₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for lau ʻie, ʻie vine leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tight, as a dress; painfully stuffed, as the stomach after overeating; narrow, as a gate opening (contraction of lāʻā, wide, and iki, small).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>width, breadth, as of cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti leaf (contraction of lau kī).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻīpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bright-yellow reef fish (Zebrasoma flavescens). lit., yellow ti leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as lau kō, sugar-cane leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lāʻō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bright-colored greenish fish, about 1.3 cm long (Halichoeres ornatissimus).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common refrain in songs, as in (EM 90).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>each of two cross sticks holding corners of the dip net called ʻupena ʻākiʻikiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common demon. occurring after both nouns and verbs, and as the last part of the demon. kēlā that (far, see table 12 in (Gram. 7.2)) and pēlā, like that; following directionals it is usually unstressed and written as the concluding part of the directional (aʻela, akula, ihola, maila). It occurs also in the sequence ua (noun) lā, that aforementioned. A var. is ala₅.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the letter 'l'.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lā₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sixth note on the musical scale, la.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lēhei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rain associated with Makawao, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lēhei₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lēkēmapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>December.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go about aimlessly, to do no work; listless, lazy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crowded, as with people.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēhei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to jump, hop, as a goat over a wall; 
   • to leap, start up and fly. 
    lēkei is a common variant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēkei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var of lēhei.
   • to jump, hop, as a goat over a wall; 
   • to leap, 
   • start up and fly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēkō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>watercress (Nasturtium microphyllum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēkō keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of watercress, said to be light green. lit., white lēkō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēkō ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of watercress with dark stems and leaves. lit., black lēkō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēpela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leprosy, leper; leprous (Oihk. 13.2) . Formerly only leprosy, and not leper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēpelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(formerly only leper).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abundance; full.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēʻiwi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of canoe with a flat manu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lēʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crowded, full. Also lēʻiwi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Līanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind reported at Hālawa, Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Līloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of an early chief, the father of ʻUmi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Līlīlehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind and rain, famous at Pālolo, Oʻahu, and Waiehu, Maui. lit., lehua chill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī anu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cool chill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī kākini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>garters. lit., tie stockings (Eng.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī kāliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corset lace; to lace up a corset.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī kāmaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shoelace; to lace shoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extremely chilly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī ʻapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a prefix to many kinds of seaweeds, short for limu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līhau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gentle cool rain that was considered lucky for fishermen (UL 241); moist and fresh, as plants in the dew or rain; cool, fresh, as dew-laden air.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līhau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any kind of lily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlia palaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>day lily (Hemerocallis spp.).  lit., pumpkin lily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlialanaikawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water lily (Nymphaea spp.) lit., lily floating on the water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līliaokeawāwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long time ago.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• spindly, undeveloped, as of plants; 
   • thin, as a line of words across a page.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of līlā,
   • spindly, undeveloped, as of plants; 
   • thin, as a line of words across a page...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upland patch, as of olonā. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlīlehua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Texas sage (Salvia coccinea), a weedy herb from southern United States, 30 cm high or more, with toothed, ovate leaves and red flowers, 2.5 cm long, borne in long narrow clusters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līlīlehua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līmanamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed. lit., branching seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpahapaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a general term for sea lettuce (Ulva fasciata and Monostroma oxyspermum), common green seaweeds with delicate broad blades, usually with wavy margins. Eaten as a minor element mixed with other tastier seaweeds. Also ʻīliohaʻa, līpaha, līpālahalaha, pahapaha (probably restricted to Kauaʻi), pakaiea (restricted to Hawaiʻi), and pālahalaha (Maui, Molokaʻi, and Oʻahu).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpaheʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Called līpāhoe on Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpaheʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed much like hulu ʻīlio₃, and perhaps the same; edible, green, soft, slippery tufts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpaoaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed. lit., fragrant seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpaʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>limu salted for indefinite storage without refrigeration; on Kauaʻi usually limu kohu from Niʻihau. Some consider līpehe, līpehu, and līpaʻakai as variants of limu kohu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as līpaʻakai, salted limu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpepeiao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed. also limu pepeiao, limu kulapepeiao.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpepeiao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fresh water moss, usually qualified by wai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpeʻepeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>some native species of a genus of edible red seaweeds (Laurencia parvipapillata, L. dotyi, L. succisa), short, with stiff, knobby branchlets, nestling especially in basaltic rock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpoa kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a nonedible mountain moss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bladelike, branched, brown seaweeds (Dictyopteris plagiogramma and D. australis) with conspicuous midrib on blade, unique aroma and flavor; highly prized on all islands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpuʻupuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an edible green seaweed (Valonia utricularis), with turgid joints and short branches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpāhoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpālāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edible, green, fresh-water algae, consisting of tufts of branching threads (Pithophora spp. and Stigeoclonium spp.), or of a network of threads (Hydrodictyon), or of simple threads (Spirogyra spp.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līpēpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līwali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, thin, as poi or dough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>līʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act wild, as a frightened animal; to open the eyes wide in terror; to quiver, leap away, shy, as a frightened horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chills; to have chills; to tremble with cold; shuddery feeling of horror.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lace, as of shoes; to lace or tie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hang, 
   • gird; 
   • to furl or reef, as a sail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lī₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>third note in musical scale, mi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lōkālia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Rosalie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lōʻihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young undersea volcano 30 kilometers southeast of Hawaiʻi Island.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lō₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a line of Oʻahu chiefs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lō-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prefix, perhaps short for loʻo-, to obtain. cf:
   lōhai, lever or stick used in prying up or raising heavy articles...
   lōkahi, unity, agreement, accord, unison, harmony... (kahi one...)
   lōkea, long European knife with a white handle... (kea white...)
   lōmilo,  to spin with fingers; to twist, as thread in making rope or cord... (milo₂ twist...)
   loʻohia, possessed; overwhelmed, stricken; to befall, happen...
   loʻokahi, var. of lōkahi, unity, agreement...
   lōpiʻo,  to bend over, as one nodding, sleeping... (piʻo₁ bent...)
   lōuhu, same as uhu, to bolt, strain...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōhai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lever or stick used in prying up or raising heavy articles; to lift thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōiele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sluggish, slow; slowness; to loiter, dillydally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōiele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōkahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unity, agreement, accord, unison, harmony; agreed, in unity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōkea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long European knife with a white handle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōkea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>child of a nīʻaupiʻo, piʻo, or naha chief, whose mother was related to him but of a junior line.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōkālia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coral plant (Russelia equisetiformis), a Mexican low shrubby plant, 30 to 120 cm high, with many leafless, green, quadrangular branches, used for low hedges and in rock gardens; it bears bright-red flowers resembling small firecrackers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōkālio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rosary. Less common than lei kolona.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game, perhaps like kilu (FS 163); a place for indoor games; evening entertainment (Ii 63–4).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>relaxed, at ease, without worry, carefree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōlā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōlōkuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deafness, as from disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōmilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spin with fingers; to twist, as thread in making rope or cord.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōnū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swell up, as with disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōpiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bend over, as one nodding, sleeping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōpālauʻeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>worthless, shiftless squatter (contraction of lōpā pālauʻeka, worthless lōpā).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōpā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who farms under a tenant (hoa ʻāina), peasant, farmer; shiftless. see naunau₁ for an insulting epithet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōpā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an uncertain term in the phrase hoʻāo lōpā, marriage with a relative 24 generations removed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lōʻohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to buck, of a horse. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a black insect, earwig (Dermaptera).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>front half of the skull.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lō₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lord.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lūhaupua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind associated with Ōlaʻa, Hawaiʻi. lit., scattering dew and flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lūkini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Russian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lūlaukō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a rain associated with Kauaʻi. lit., rain that scatters sugar-cane leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lūpua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name associated with Wainiha, Kauaʻi. lit., flower scattering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shaking down of dew or rain drops from tree boughs by a breeze; to fall thus; scattered dew, dewladen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū heleleʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter, strew; to let hair hang loose and unbound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū lehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter lehua flowers, said poetically of rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter flowers, as by a flower girl at a wedding; to decorate graves with flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūauʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>true parent, as contrasting with foster parent or aunt or uncle (makua).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing for octopus with line and cowry lure; the octopus lure; to fish thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūkea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of taro, probably Kauaʻi name for haokea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūkini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perfume.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūkini₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lemon grass (Cymbopogon citratus), a grass with fragrant leaves, lemony odor, edges sharp; the leaves are dried and used for tea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prod open, as bivalves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red tapa design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calm, windless, dead still; bored.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei of braided leaves or ferns. cf. (And).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlū hua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sower; to sow seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlū lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shake hands; handshake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to scatter, sow, as seeds; 
   • to fan, winnow; 
   • to shake, as dice or the hands, or as an earthquake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>donation, offering, as in church; to make an offering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūlū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>raffle, lottery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūmanawahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stomach disorder accompanied by gas and looseness of the bowels; to suffer thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūpō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish said to resemble the pāpiopio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūʻau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greenish meat in a turtle, considered a delicacy; so named because the color of its meat suggested the color of taro tops.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lūʻau₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of soft porous stone, as used in the ground oven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to scatter, throw, as ashes; 
   • to sow, broadcast; 
   • to shed, as a chicken its feathers or a tree its leaves; 
   • to push aside; 
   • to drip, as water; 
   • to shake; 
   • to cast off, as grief; 
   • to spend recklessly, squander, 
   • discard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seeds of the pua kala, prickly poppy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gunshot, so called because the pellets suggested the lū seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lū₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scalloped hat braid, as made of bamboo, sugar-cane stem, pandanus, or coconut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mahapili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of twin stars (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mahikiokaluakanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mahiʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mahomeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mohammed; Mohammedan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maiakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stars in the belt of Orion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maiao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star used in navigation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maikonekia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Micronesia; Micronesian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maile₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>four sweet-scented sisters with human and plant forms: Mailehaʻiwale (brittle maile), Mailekaluhea (fragrant maile), Mailelauliʻi (small-leaved maile), Mailepākaha (Laie 454-455). They appear in numerous legends, in the most famous as guardians of Lāʻieikawai and her house thatched with bird feathers in legendary Paliuli. Fragrance had supernatural power and was associated with gods (HM 531), royalty, and religion, especially for worshipers of Laka, the hula goddess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maka-ʻamoʻamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star or constellation in the Milky Way. lit., twinkling eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makahaiaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makahaiwaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., eye following canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makahiki Hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>New Year.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaholowaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, perhaps variant name for the North Star. lit., sailing-canoe eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaihuwaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaikiolea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name, probably at Kauaʻi. lit., small eye of Lea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaiwa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nine guiding stars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makakakeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Madagascar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makakukeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Massachusetts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makalaukoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pleiades; Castor and Pollux. see Pleiades.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaliʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian month name; the six summer months collectively.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaliʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a chief of Waimea, Kauai, father-in-law of Manokalanipō, and famous as an agriculturalist. A month and the summer season collectively were named for him. During the makahiki festivals food plants were symbolically dropped from his net (HM 366-367). Several times Kamapuaʻa killed all of Chief ʻOlopana₁'s men except Makaliʻi, who as the sole survivor took the news to ʻOlopana₁. Later, when Makaliʻi had become chief of Kauaʻi, he was frightened by Kamapuaʻa's long chant of his victories; he then chanted Kama's name songs, and so his life was spared, but he was sent away to live in the mountains. (FS 198-203, 230-239). In one account (For. 5:364-365), the gods Kāne and Kanaloa sent messengers up (i luna) to ask Makaliʻi whether Kaulu, a noisy kava drinker, was man or god. Later Makaliʻi gave his nets to Kaulu so that he might entangle and kill Haumea. His name is given to the Pleiades. By some he was considered a navigator.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makanihānailoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a gentle wind; it is said to permit loli to come out of their holes and feed.  lit., wind that feeds sea slug.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Macao, a city governed by Portugal, near Hong Kong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaʻimoʻimo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a constellation in the Milky Way. lit., blinking eyes, twinkling eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaʻiolani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., eye of the royal hawk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaʻunulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a navigational star. lit., eyes drawing many.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makaʻālohilohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., bright eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makeaupeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star or constellation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makekonia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Macedonia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Madeira.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Madrid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makuakaʻūmana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, said to be in the Kaulua constellation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Saturn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Makulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Saturn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Malaya; Malay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Malaya.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malaia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Malay, Malaya, Malaysia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malailua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a strong, blustering wind at Nuʻu-anu; to blow, of this wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Malacca.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malalei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malamaiku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unidentified star, pronunciation uncertain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malanai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a gentle breeze associated with Kōloa, Kauaʻi, Hāna, Maui (For. 5:97), and Kailua, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maleka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>America.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maleka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maliu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maliʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mythical woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malukoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a rain associated with Kahaluʻu, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Malulani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., celestial shade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mana Lani Kahikolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Almighty Holy Trinity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manakekeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Manchester.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manakulia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Manchuria.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manakū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manawahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, said to appear in the first night of the month Nana and to vanish after the night of Muku. lit., female power.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Manila hat, named for the city.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Manila.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manini₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian name of a well-known Spanish immigrant, Francisco de Paula Marin, who knew Kamehameha for more than 25 years.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Manokalanipō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a chief of Kauaʻi... husband of Nae [or Na'e]kapuani (the daughter of Makaliʻi), and an ancestor of Kawelo. Kauaʻi is sometimes referred to poetically as Kauaʻi o Mano (RC 194), Kauaʻi o Manokalanipō (HM 141, 366) or Manō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maukele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place name at Puna, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maukuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, perhaps related to Konamaukuku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauliola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place name at Kīlauea Volcano, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twenty-ninth of the old month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Hora</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mount Hor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Huka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mount Hood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Kalemela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mount Carmel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the highest mountain on Hawaiʻi. lit., snow mountain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Kupalali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mount Souffrière.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the second highest mountain on Hawaiʻi; a mountain and village on Molokaʻi. lit., long mountain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Pōhaku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Rocky Mountains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Mauna Pōhaku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poetical name for Utah.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maʻaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a famous wind associated with Lahaina, Maui. also ʻA ʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maʻaʻa Kua Lapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind at Kahaluʻu, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maʻaʻa Paʻimalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name. lit., Portuguese man-of-war Maʻaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Maʻiola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a god of healing...  who was said to occupy certain trees, the wood of which counteracted the noxious effects of poison from the kālaipāhoa wood. lit., cured sickness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ma o</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>because of, due to, by means of, through.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ma-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stative prefix indicating quality or state...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stinking, as of unwashed bodies; 
   • malodorous, as a swamp; 
   • offensive-smelling, as vomit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maemae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>damp, as clothes suitable for ironing. fade (Aniani 27)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clump or grove of trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha mea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a deep-sea fish, said to be striped (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha pepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad-browed. lit., flat brow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha wela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha ʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grove or clump of breadfruit trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha ʻōʻō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish of the ʻahi type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha ʻōʻō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piece of sweet potato broken off by the ʻōʻō, digging stick. same as the more common kūʻōʻō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tear, split, separate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish, said to belong to the lāʻīpala group.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>net mesh, about 10 cm and above, between māhā and mālewa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a surgeonfish (Acanthuridae).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahahaʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahakea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>once uncultivated land, as for bananas, sweet potato, taro; fallow land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahakea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahakea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava, usually called mākea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rude, disrespectful, saucy, overbearing; encroaching on the property or rights of others. lit., double temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahamaha kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white-jowled, as of a pig or dog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahamaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gill plate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahamaha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show or feel pleasure, love, affection; affectionate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahamaha₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, sometimes qualified by keʻokeʻo, white.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahamoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>attractive, sleek, as a plump animal; smooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahamoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an edible bivalve (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warmth, heat; warm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a class of chiefs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahaoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mature in wisdom; wise; wise person. lit., mature temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temple, side of the head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gill plate of a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wings of a flying fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>preputium, foreskin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower portion of a canoe manu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• rest, repose, vacation; 
   • freedom from pain; 
   • at ease, comfort
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maha₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>severed portion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>duty, work section, shift.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele kaua lewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>air force.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>military unit, squadron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dividend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portion of medicine, dose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>division of time, as of a fiscal period.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele waiwai hoʻopuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>share of profits, dividend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interpreter, translator; to translate, interpret.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to translate, interpret.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heap, pile, as of trash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maheu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dig and rake the earth, as for planting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maheu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of porous stone, used to rub, scour, polish, and as an octopus lure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahi kō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar-cane plantation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahi pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flower garden or patch; horticulture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahi waena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weed cultivator; to cultivate and weed. lit., weeding farm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahi waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vineyard; grape raiser; to cultivate grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahikina lā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crack of dawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to jump, leap, hop, move up and down, 
   • vibrate; 
   • to spatter; 
   • to teeter, seesaw; a seesaw.
   • to weigh, as on scales;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cast out spirits, exorcise, especially with mahiki shrimps; 
   • to treat in turn, as troubles in hoʻoponopono family therapy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any kind of shrimp used ceremoniously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiki₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to pry; 
   • peel off, as a scab
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiki₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiki₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appear (of the sun)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clear land for planting; plantation clearing not yet planted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip away property.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina hapalua hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>waning of the moon. lit., last half of the moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina hapalua mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>waxing of the moon. lit., first half of the moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina hou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>new moon, new month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina hou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>church offering on the first Sunday of the month, of Congregationalists.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina piha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full moon. lit., round moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahinakēhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahinalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small creeping native fern (Grammitis tenella), with simple narrow fronds 5 cm long or longer, each bearing none to many round spots of spores.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crescent-shaped fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eye of the snail at the end of its horn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>farm, plantation, patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of onion, similar to silver onion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahina₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feather helmet, helmet; to wear a helmet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plunder thoroughly; to take all, as a chief taking all the property of his subjects. lit., dig skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiʻopu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bold, rude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahiʻopu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dig, as with a pickax.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cultivate, farm; a farm, plantation, patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong, energetic, as a worker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahola₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread out; to smooth out, as a cloth to dry; to extend, expand. see hola₁ and ex. heʻe₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bruise, skin, scrape, as a flesh wound; to injure as the feelings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thick, as a cloud. Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahu kai loloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• same as ʻaʻau loa, long stalks; 
   • fig., long-suffering and patient, as of a chief who cared for his people (Malo text, chapter 18, section 54, 59, 63).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mockery, derision, spying (rarely used without hoʻo-).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahuakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disbelieving, cynical, skeptical, as of religion; irreligious, atheistic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run away, flee, escape, elope; fugitive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahulukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aerial roots of pandanus or other trees, as banyans.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahumahu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>silent, weak, brittle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open, as a box; to take out, remove, as gear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to guess, suppose, surmise, expect, suspect, assume, imagine; clue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahuʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as mahuka ē, to flee beforehand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahāha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, tender, weak; soft and mealy, as a baked potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, flat, as diluted kava or stale beer; insipid, as fresh poi kept too long in the icebox; quiet, peaceful, undisturbed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mahūmahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of mahū, weak, flat... (commonly said of tasteless poi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mai laila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>from there, thence, whence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maialile</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quiet, calm, still.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiapilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a low, smooth shrub (Capparis sandwichiana) with vinelike branches, a member of the caper family, growing on some beaches and lava flows; leaves rounded-oblong; flowers white, pea-shaped, 5 cm long, with four petals surrounding a mass of long white stamens, open and fragrant only at night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• neat and careful in work; 
   • skillful, ingenious, expert; 
   • correct, careful, as in speech; 
   • thorough, meticulous tidy, dainty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eloquence, skill in speaking; eloquent; skilled in asking questions to puzzle and confuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep-sea fishing net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maihoʻikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(usually written as three words).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maihua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maihuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>presents made at the birth of a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maika₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strengthening the body, as by athletics.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maika₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tired, weary, lame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maika₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tasteless, insipid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a surgeonfish (Acanthurus nigroris).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the directional mai plus lā, there, then.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mailani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to extol, praise, treat as a chief or great favorite, indulge, spoil, favor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the myrtle (Myrtus communis), an aromatic shrub from the Mediterranean region and western Asia, a favorite garden plant in many countries, and formerly used in Rome for wreaths to crown the victor. The leaves look like those of maile and formerly were used by Hawaiian for leis like maile, the bark being stripped from the stems in the same way, with teeth holding one end.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile haʻi wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of maile (f. myrtillifolia) with small, rounded leaves. lit., brittle maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile hohono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tropical American annual composite (Ageratum conyzoides and A. houstonianum), both a weed and an ornamental. It is a hairy, branching, weak-stemmed herb, with light-blue (rarely white or pink) florets borne in small tufted heads.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile kaluhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., sweet-smelling maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile kā kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., foreign vine maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile kūhonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a maile seedling about 8 cm or less high, with two or three leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile lau liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of maile (f. angusta), with narrow pointed leaves. lit., small-leaved maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile lau nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of maile (f. sulcata), with large leaves. lit., big-leaved maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stink vine (Paederia foetida). lit., stinking maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile pākaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of maile (f. rotundata), with blunt ovate leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maile₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>maile sticks attached to the end of the ʻaukuʻu (pole) used for catching birds (the maile was gummed with lime, and birds perching on it were caught); name of a snare used in catching plovers around the leg; rod or wand used in the games of pūhenehene and ʻume; piece securing an ox's neck to the yoke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maina hoʻopahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>explosive mine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mainaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anger, wrath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maipoinaiaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forget-me-not.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa Kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an Oʻahu name for maiʻa Polapola.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa Nuhōlani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of introduced banana cultivated by Hawaiians for many generations. The trunk is tall, green; the fruit yellow, edible raw or cooked. lit., New Holland (Australian) banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa Polapola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of banana (Musa troglodytarum, syn. M. fehi) recently introduced to Hawaiʻi, known in the South Pacific from Mangareva west to the Moluccas. It has a tall, black trunk and upright fruiting stalk bearing large fruits with reddish-orange skin, yellow flesh, edible when cooked, sometimes made into poi maiʻa. lit., Borabora [i.e., Tahitian] banana. (HP 177), (Neal 250).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa Puna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., Puna banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa Pākē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Chinese banana (Musa xnana, syn. M. cavendishii), a stocky tree to more than 2 m high, a native of southern China, brought in 1855 to Hawaiʻi from Tahiti.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa akua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maui name for maiʻa Polapola. lit., god banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa aʻeaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., prematurely gray banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa haikea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana that bears yellow fruit, edible raw or cooked.  lit., pale banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa haʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, with short trunk and leaves, but taller than maiʻa Pākē. The fruit is yellow, edible raw or cooked.  lit., low banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hilahila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., bashful banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hinu puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., hog's-grease banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hua lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., bearing two bunches, twin banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hua moa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., egg banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hua nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana lit., big-fruited banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hua waena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., central fruit banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., whitish banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hāpai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana of medium height, the fruit maturing within the trunk. The fruits are small, ten or fewer in a bunch, yellow, sweet, edible raw. (HP 175), (Neal 250).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa hēʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Fēʻī is the Tahitian name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa iho lena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, popular and common. The trunk is green, purple, and pink. Fruits are salmon-pink, edible raw cooked; one of the few bananas formerly permitted to women. lit., yellow-cored banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ihu ʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, growing wild on Kauaʻi and Hawaiʻi, rarely cultivated. The fruit is yellow, edible only when cooked.  lit., snub-nosed banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana growing wild on Maui, rarely cultivated. The trunk is tall; the fruit long, skin yellow, flesh white and edible only when cooked. lit., foreign or Tahitian banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa kahiki hae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, similar to maiʻa kahiki, but having short trunk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa kahiki mauki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana with tall, green trunk. The fruits looks like maiʻa kahiki.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa koana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian seed-producing variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa koaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, beautifully striped leaves, trunk, and young fruit. Fruit is yellow and round; flesh yellow, edible cooked or raw. Also called maiʻa aʻeaʻe, maiʻa manini.  lit., tropic bird banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa lahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient Hawaiian variety of banana. lit., delicate banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a common wild Hawaiian variety of banana of the uplands; trunk tall, yellowish-green; fruit yellow; flesh pink, edible raw or cooked, good for piepiele, eczema. Root of shoot used in medicine. The fruit was commonly offered to gods, the tree planted to shelter the altar. It was planted far from a dwelling house, for fear it would cause the occupants to lele (fly) elsewhere. lit., altar banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa liko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., bud banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa loha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient Hawaiian variety of banana; trunk and leaf like maiʻa lele, fruit like maiʻa iho lena. lit., droopy banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa mana lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., two-branched banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa manini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., manini (fish) banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, growing in uplands and lowlands. It has a green trunk, large leaves. The fruit is long, waxy-yellow, and has yellow flesh, edible raw or cooked.  lit., indigenous banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa moa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana with a tall, yellowish-green trunk. The fruit is large, somewhat egg-shaped, and yellow; the flesh yellow, edible raw or cooked.  lit., chicken banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa māhoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, the stem bearing two bunches; fruit small, yellow, flesh light salmon and very palatable. lit., twin banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa mālei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana; trunk green and pink, streaked with brown; fruit like maiʻa puhi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa mālei ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, common both cultivated and wild in the uplands. Fibers of the stalk are used for stringing flowers for leis with a coconut-leaf needle (mānai). Ripening fruit changes from maroon (ʻula) to green to yellow; the flesh is orange, edible only when cooked. also maiʻa mālai ʻula, maiʻa mānei ʻula, maiʻa mānai ʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa noʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, usually cultivated; the trunk green, with pink and brown markings; fruit short, thick, yellow, the flesh cream-colored, edible raw or cooked.  lit., short banana or big-mouthful banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa poni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., purple banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa puapua nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana.  lit., big-tailed banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa puhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient Hawaiian variety of banana with green and brown trunk. The fruit is twisted when young; when ripe long, thick, yellow, the flesh yellow and edible only when cooked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa pālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., banana in pairs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa pō lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient Hawaiian variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa pōpō ʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, with short, green trunk; one of two varieties not taboo to women in old times; the root of young plants used medicinally. Fruit is rounded and yellow, the flesh salmon-pink, edible raw but preferred baked. lit., breadfruit ball-like banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa wai mūhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient variety of Hawaiian banana.  lit., insipid water banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻanoʻano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana with seeds. lit., seeded banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻau lena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient variety of banana. lit., yellow-stem banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻaʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall, wild bananas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana; fruit with skin changing from red to green to yellow, edible when cooked. lit., discolored banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻeke ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient Hawaiian variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of mountain banana with black trunk, the skin of which is used to make designs in mats. The fruit has orange flesh, which is edible when cooked.  lit., black banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻili pakapaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of rough-skinned banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably a distinct species of Hawaiian banana, according to W. T. Pope, being unique in producing fertile seeds. Trunk and leaves dull-green, tinted with bronze and purple; fruit inedible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻa ʻohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient Hawaiian variety of banana. lit., bamboo banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻakaualau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana. Fruit like that of maiʻa maoli, except that the young, dark-green fruit has light-green spots like raindrops; when ripe, yellow, waxy, with flesh light-yellow, good only when baked.  lit., many rain drops banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nail of finger or toe; hoof of an animal; claw of a bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻapōpōʻulupuapuanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian variety of banana, resembling maiʻa iho lena, but the fruit broad-tipped. lit., bigtailed pōpō ʻulu banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maiʻapōpōʻuluʻililahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., thin-skinned pōpō ʻulu. same as maiʻapōpōʻululahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>mai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>imminence-marking part. Almost, nearly, as though.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faint path or trail; beginning of a path.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka hakahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sunken eyes, as one long sick; deep pit or hollow; open space, as a clearing in a forest or clear space in a lava flow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka helei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eye with lid drawn down; ectropion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka hilahila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bashful eyes; bashful, timidly averting one's gaze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka hinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright face, cheerful look.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beginning, new start.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka hīʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyes that dart in every direction, as if looking for mischief; a mischievously alluring look.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ihe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spear point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ihu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bowsprit of a canoe; sharp point at the bow. lit., bow point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eye smaller than the other. lit., small eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a senile pigmentation caused by sunburn of the eye, as found among Hawaiians; person with such an eye (such persons were said to be observant and critical). lit., birthmark eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kakaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shifty eyes; to have such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many people, crowds of people.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka keleawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brazen look; horse eye of a whitish color, but with good vision. lit., brass eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look out of the corner of the eyes; eye drawn back at the corner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kila₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name given to the kala poni, sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kila₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pen; steel point, as of a weapon. lit., steel (Eng.) point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>observant, watchful eyes; to watch with great attention.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proud look (Sol. 6.17) ; haughty air.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flirtatious eyes; to lure or attract with the eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bold, unafraid, fierce. lit., brave eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka koali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild sweet potato found in Puna, Hawaiʻi; it may have been eaten in famine times; fed raw to pigs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka koʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>landmark for a fishing ground. lit., fishing-ground point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka kui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>needle or nail point; stitch. cf. maka o ke kui, eye of a needle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cross-eyed, with eyes that seem to look inward. lit., roving eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka launa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>friendly, having many friends and associates; sociable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lehua flower petals. fig., attractive, as young girls.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unfriendly, suspicious glance from under the eyelid; to glance thus. lit., drawn eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellow center of a flower, as of a daisy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka leʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twinkle-eyed, happy-eyed, mischievous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lilio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyes with epicanthic fold.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very green, as a fruit; barely cooked, very raw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lokomaikaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bountiful eye (Sol. 22.9) ; one who looks kindly, charitably, and with good will. lit., good-hearted face.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyelid turned back, exposing the under side of the lid; an insulting term, as prisoners were tortured by tattooing the exposed eyelid. lit., turned eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two-face, double-edged; two-fold, as a plaited mat; hypocritical.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>socket of the eyeball. fig., depths of the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka lua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing net with mesh wide enough to admit two fingers. lit., double mesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka luhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tired eyes, tired people, especially those who have been working hard on a community project.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka mino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indented, non-protruding nipple, as is difficult for a baby to grasp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka moena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mesh in mat made by plaiting over one and under one; similar style in quilting; check plait. lit., mat mesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• first, beginning, commencement, first time; 
   • first child of a family. 
   lit., first end.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka nunui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>big eyes. cf. kiʻi maka nunui under kiʻi₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• eyetooth; 
   • point of a dog's tooth, 
   • fig., point of an ʻōʻō, digging stick; sprouting plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka onaona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sweet, lovely, or tender expression of face or eyes; also said of the eyes of the kole, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka pala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, ripe; ready to burst, of a boil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka pela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty face; sticky, dirty eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka peni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pen point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka piapia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyes sticky with viscous matter; watery eyes; insulting epithet for one who does not find what he is looking for.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breast nipple that stands out and is easy for a baby to take; pig nipple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka puhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishhook with two opposite barbs, as used for eels. lit., eel point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka pī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>running eyes, bleary eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka pōniuniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizziness, faintness, lack of courage; obscure, dizzy, faint. lit., dizzy eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka uhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>face tattooed solid, without patterning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka uhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tattooed eyelid, as a humiliating sign of a warrior's defeat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka uhi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>downcast eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black eye, as from a bruise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>watery-eyed; eyes welling with tears; tender-eyed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nipple of the breast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka weli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glaring, threatening eyes; to glare, glower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sennit mesh; fairly fine mesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻaiau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>envious eye; to eye with envy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻaloʻalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shifty-eyed. lit., dodging eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mischievous or roving eyes, naughty eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to see clearly and with keen powers of observation; to see more than most, especially to see supernatural things or ghosts not seen by others; to have the gift of second sight. lit., seeing eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look at with hatred; to lose affection for one; one who looks with hatred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piercing, penetrating, sharp eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excelling eye, epithet for a councilor (kālaimoku), who had served under three rulers in three generations, and hence was regarded as full of wisdom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pinkeye; inflamed or bloodshot eye. lit., red eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻupena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>net mesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wide, staring eyes. lit., glowing eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka ʻāhewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>walleyed; cross-eyed. lit., eyes that err.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka-ʻupena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design, as carved on a tapa beater and used in quilting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look around; a roving eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hasty; active, as a child into everything.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to step lightly, touch lightly, to skim lightly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inflamed or swollen eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pig disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• admiration, to admire;  
   • desire for, 
   • wonder; 
   • amazement; 
   • attractive, entrancing; 
   • be entangled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahekili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hailstone. lit., thunder eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roving, unsteady, restless eyes; sleepless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahiapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first-born child, oldest child. lit., firstborn person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahiki leleʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leap year. lit., year jump ahead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahiki lā keu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leap year. lit., extra-day year.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient festival beginning about the middle of October and lasting about four months, with sports and religious festivities and taboo on war; this is now replaced by Aloha Week.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of hard stone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahune</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine mesh or weft, as of net or mat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makahālili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a marine shell (Peasiella tantilla).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare term defined in (For. 5:165) as a swift runner; probably makaiʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaiauli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a limpet, Celluna exarata; flesh within ʻopihi shells.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaihuwaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>phosphorescent light seen in water at night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rocky patches where sweet potatoes or taro were cultivated (For. 6:165); soil consisting of coarse sand, cinders, or gravel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makailo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young shoot, as for transplanting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaiwa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mother-of-pearl eyes, as in an image, especially of the god Lono.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaiʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whitened pupil of a blind person's eye, cataract. lit., fish eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaiʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of stone, used for adzes and poi pounders.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea-washed; spray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makakiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mask. lit., image face.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makakuʻikuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scowl, leer hatefully. lit., pounding eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makakēhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heart's desire. lit., dew eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look at with hatred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>creative imagination of an artist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beach, shore, coast near a point (lae).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalahia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sleepless, awake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalapua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handsome, beautiful; to blossom forth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carbuncle, boil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster of spears.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many buds, as on a pussy willow. fig., many offspring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to loosen, undo, untie, 
   • open a little, 
   • liberate or set at liberty; 
   • to remit, as a debt; 
   • to forgive; 
   • to free of defilement or uncleanness; 
   • to open or unfold, as a flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a trail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaleha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look about as in wonder or admiration, to glance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaleho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• covetous, lustful, wanton, lascivious;
   • incontinence;  
   • to admire (Kel. 17), desire. 
   lit., cowrie eye, perhaps so called because the octopus clings to the cowrie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a major illness (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine muslin cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalena puʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dotted swiss cloth. lit., lumped muslin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marguerite, daisy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uniform, as in color, style, clothes. lit., similar face.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taut, as a rope. lit., tight mesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny, very small, fine, wee, small-meshed; narrow wefts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makali₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barely cooked, underdone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makali₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glowing, bright, as of fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makali₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bait a hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a perennial sedge (Cyperus laevigatus), found in or near fresh or salt water in warm countries. From a horizontal, creeping stem rise long, slender unbranched stems, each topped by a small inflorescence. Formerly the plants were valued in Hawaiʻi for making the fine Niʻihau mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for shellfish with long sharp edges (Thais intermedia, Drupa morum). see also ʻōlepe makaloa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaloa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaluku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plan slaughter; to determine to destroy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makalē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mackerel, canned sardines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makamae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>precious, of great value, highly prized, darling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makamaka heluhelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reader, as of a newspaper. lit., reading friend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makamaka hānai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>friend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makamaka nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one with a host of friends because of a genial, kindly, or hospitable nature; many friends.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makamaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intimate friend with whom one is on terms of receiving and giving freely; pal, buddy; host. fig., anything very helpful, as education.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makamaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buds, as forming on the corm of a taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makame</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Madame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makamua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lead horses or oxen in a team.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makana aloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gift of friendship or love; freewill offering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makana hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parting gift. lit., going gift.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makanahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild, untamed; of the wilderness or forest. lit., forest person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makanau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twinkling of eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makanaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plants growing on lava beds (probably a contraction or maka i nāʻaʻā, budding in the lava).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani hau none</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ice-cold mountain wind. lit., icy, annoying wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani hele uluulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hurricane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani holo ʻūhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cold wind. lit., wind running [over] thighs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani kamaʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>usual wind of a place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani kaʻa wiliwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tornado. lit., wind revolving twisting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani kū honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sudden strong wind, gust. lit., wind arriving suddenly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirit that possesses a medium and speaks through him. lit., spirit that takes possession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani pāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cyclone, hurricane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani pūkīkī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gust, strong wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani uluulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hurricane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani wili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whirlwind, twisting wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani ʻoluʻolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>favorable or fair wind, refreshing breeze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ghost, spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makani₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>call of sentinel, similar to "all's well".
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makanunui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>widely spaced, as grooves on a tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>person blind in one eye, one-eyed; blind in one eye (it was considered bad luck to meet such a person); blind. lit., closed eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• swollen; 
   • suffering from hunger; 
   • hungry person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine-meshed, as a mat of medium weft, as 1.5 cm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapipipi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small eyes; pregnant women were discouraged from eating pipipi shellfish lest their children be born with small eyes, hence the name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapipipi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny, twinkling stars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variety of fish (no data). lit., bulging eyes, hill point.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapāpipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollow worn in lava rock by the sea, where salt is collected, natural salt pan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feeble, of light, as firelight in the daytime; shy, wild, as a bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stones that break in a fire, not desirable for the imu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makapōuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizziness; dizzy, faint. lit., blacknight eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makau pāweo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small shell hook, as used for ʻōpelu fishing. lit., hook to turn away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makauaua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to toughen by drying, as hide. lit., tough face.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hardhearted, unfriendly; troubled, vexed. lit., tough face.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to increase, grow larger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety or taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makauliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• economical, thrifty, provident; 
   • miserly, avaricious, eager to own.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makauliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad-backed, thick-shelled, of a turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small outlets for water through banks of taro patches; small waterways; water sources.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makawalu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>numerous, many, much, in great quantities (sometimes used with implication of chiefly mana). lit., eight eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makawalu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of fighting on plains covered with brush, with irregularly grouped warriors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makawela₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• glowing, burning; 
   • full of hate, fury, anger. 
   • fig. term for the despised kauā, outcasts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makawela₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of stone from which weights for cowry octopus lures were made.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hammock, swinging netted bed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skin eruption, itch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alert, vigilant, watchful, wide awake; to attend to vigilantly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blind, but with eyes that look normal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• chilled, frozen. 
   • fig., benumbing, intense, tense, as emotion; 
   • exhausting, wearisome, of labor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>guard; watchful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻopihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opihi scooped out of its shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻopihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine pandanus mat, of 6 cm strands. lit., fine mesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻu kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fear of images representing gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻu kūhewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sudden fear, panic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻu wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coward, cowardice; afraid for no reason, easily frightened.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻuo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gathering and tying, as pala fern for a heiau service,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻupena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>midriff, fat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻuwāwae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excrement lying exposed on the ground. lit., feared [by] feet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻuwāwae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anything on which one fears to tread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻāloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small reddish crab (Macrophthalmus telescopicus) found on mud flats. lit., long, bright eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻāwela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of soft, porous stone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (Malacanthus hoedtii).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look at with disfavor; to look askance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻīʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as maka līʻō, wild eye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻōpio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>makaʻūpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• beloved one, favorite; 
   • person. 
   cf. makamaka (very common), makana, pula, ʻōnohi. The pig god was affectionately called kuʻu maka (FS 199) by his grandmother, rather like "apple of my eye."
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• point, 
   • bud, 
   • protuberance; 
   • center of a flower, including usually both the stamens and pistils; 
   • nipple, teat; 
   • sharp edge or blade of an instrument; 
   • point of a fishhook; 
   • beginning, commencement; 
   • source; 
   • any new plant shoot coming up. 
   • fig., descendant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• mesh of a net, 
   • mesh in plaiting; 
   • stitch, in sewing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably same as manu, canoe bow and stern pieces
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed. see alani, brown seaweeds, and below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>varieties of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>maka₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>recognition token.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>make anu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be very cold, chilled, freezing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>make kaka ola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>death caused by capturing the spirit of a live person. lit., death strike [the] living.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>make loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to die (in contrast to make, which may mean "defeated, faint"). For a pre-Christian concept, see make₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>make pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>complete defeat, as in card games, to be completely defeated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>make pōloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to die of starvation; faint with hunger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>make ulu niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>madness; to be mad.  lit., death [from] whirling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>make wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to die of itself, to die without cause, to die or wilt easily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>