<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hemuwā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sound indistinctly, as a voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hemū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shoo, be off, scat (perhaps from Eng. move).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buttocks; mons pubis; hollow of the thigh; nakedness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hene ʻūhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inner side of the thighs where they join the body on either side of the genitals; groins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>henehene₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to laugh at, ridicule, mock, tease, snicker, giggle; mockery, laughter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hene₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mons pubis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hene₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slope, as of a hill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hene₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to snicker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>henoheno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lovable, sweet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heoheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as heo₁ and pōheoheo, knob.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>knob of any kind, as of a door; end of the penis, prepuce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to depart in haste.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proud, haughty (less common than haʻaheo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• idiot, moron, imbecile; feebleminded, moronic.
   • partial paralysis of the vocal organs causing indistinct articulation;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hepekoma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>week; seven years.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heu aniani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine bits of broken or ground glass; mercury on glass made into a mirror.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heumiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beautiful, comely, attractive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• down or fine hair, fuzz, fuzzy, downy; 
   • loose fibers on certain fruits or leaves, hairlike growths or spines on sugar cane stalks or cactus;
   • quicksilver or mercury on back of a mirror,  
   • to begin to grow, as a youth's beard or pubic hair; 
   • to sprout, of seedlings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hewahewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a great many, very, vast, in great quantities.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hewahewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crazy, demented, wild, aimless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hewahewa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fail to recognize.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Is it wrong to? Then why not?
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hewa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offended, annoyed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hewa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to the point of satiety; to be in great quantities; to do excessively.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stained red, inflamed, reddened; flattened and destroyed, as by lava; blood red; a blood sacrifice, as hog or man.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻaheʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to imprint with spots, stains; smeared, as with red earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe hōlua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to ride a hōlua sled; the hōlua course;
   • fig.., an expression of pride in descent from certain chiefly families at Waipiʻo, Hawaiʻi, who were famous for their skill with the hōlua sled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flow of blood, hemorrhage, menstrual flow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe mākoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of large red octopus (Octopus ornatus); it was rarely eaten because of its bitter taste, but was sometimes used as medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe mākole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>squid beginning to decompose, with a pinkish color and a bad odor, liked by some.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe nehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>season when nehu fish run; to run in schools, of nehu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe pali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny, young octopus that clings to rocks along sea pools, especially in certain seasons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe pulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>octopus slightly decomposed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe puʻewai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to surf toward the mouth of a stream or up the stream.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe pālaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an octopus settled on the ocean floor with tentacles spread out.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe pū loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long-headed, long-tentacled octopus (Octopus ornatus), very tough, tenderized only by much pounding; now called the night octopus. lit., long-headed octopus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe umauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>body surfing; to body surf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻeheʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>avalanche.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻeheʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breast disease, with caking and great pain during nursing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻewale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>miscarriage; to have a miscarriage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>see also. heʻe₆ 'to flee'
   • to slide, slip,
   • surf,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to melt, soften; 
   • flow, 
   • drip, 
   • to skim, as milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang down, as fruit; to sag; to bear breadfruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>line that supports the mast, stay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻe₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻupueo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a reedlike grass, a bent grass (Agrostis avenacea, synonyms A. retrofracta and Calamagrostis forsteri), originally found in Australia, and now found through Polynesia; Panicum heupueo on Niʻihau. lit., owl hoot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻupueo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probable Hawaiian name for pili uka, a grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hoot, as of an owl; to croak, hoot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>heʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep-throated sounds made in Hawaiian chants and prayers; to chant thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hik</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation for hikina, east.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of an unknown person, used something like so-and-so, usually followed by mā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikauhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the wife of the famous legendary navigator, Pākaʻa and of the coastal area, Molokaʻi, where she lived. She was lost during labor pains and her husband searched vainly for her, hence the saying applied to fruitless endeavors, Hikauhi i Kaumanamana, Hikauhi is at Kaumanamana [another place on Molokaʻi]. [cf slightly different explanation at (ON 1162)]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikianalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, described as medium-bright and near the equator; visible from April to September; used as a guide to mariner and fisherman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikikauelia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star; according to some, Sirius.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikikauelono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikikaulonomeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the star Sirius.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikiliimakaounulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name, perhaps morning star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Orient.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Orient.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikipua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name associated with Hālawa, Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hikiʻaumoana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi name for the star Hikianalia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hiku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>generally known as Hiku, this hero was the son of Kū-ʻōhiʻa-laka and the goddess Hina. lit., Hiku in the forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hilina Ehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star and of a Hawaiian month (same as Māhoe Mua: see month).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hilina Mā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the eleventh month (Molokaʻi) eighth (Kauaʻi), or tenth (Alexander).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first night of the new moon. See (Malo 35).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hilo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a famous Polynesian navigator for whom the city and district may have been named. see sayings, Hilo (Eng.-Hawaiian)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Himela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Himalayas. See song, hene₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinaiaʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian star and month name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinaikamalama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vague accounts (HM 214) mention this goddess as being born in the undersea land Kahikihonuakele (wet land Kahiki), and as floating on the sea and becoming a gourd bailer—Hinaikekā (Hina in the bailer) (KL. 235). In some stories she makes tapa in the moon (HM 220). She was also called Hinahanaakamalama (Hina foster-child of the moon), the name of Queen Emma's home in Nuʻu-anu Valley, Honolulu. lit., Hina in the moon. see ʻAikanaka₃; Hema.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinaikekā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goddess of canoe bailers, sometimes called the sister of Hina who was the mother of Māui (HM 219), or equated with the mother of corals, Hinaʻōpūhalakoʻa. Most commonly she took the form of a gourd canoe bailer (kā); Wākea found her floating and took her into his canoe. lit., Hina (in) the bailer. see Hinaikamalama; Pīmoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinaliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a chief in whose time occurred a famous deluge called kai a ka Hinaliʻi; the Biblical flood (Kin. 6.17) . See saying ʻiliki₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinaliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star that appears in the month of Hilinehu and follows in its course the star Polowehilani [Polo-Wehi-Lani].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinamālailena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, said to be the tutelary star of Hāna, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinapukuʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goddess of food plants (HM 69), also known as Hinahele, and sister of Hinapukuiʻa. She assumed the form of Lea, and as an ʻelepaio flycatcher alighted on trees that canoe makers wanted to cut; if she pecked a tree, canoe makers knew that it was insect ridden and not suitable for a canoe. The spot where she landed on a felled tree was to be the prow; she then ran toward the stern. lit., Hina gathering vegetable food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinaʻaikamalama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a legendary goddess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinaʻōpūhalakoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goddess of corals and spiny creatures of the sea, appearing as a woman and as a coral reef. From her shells Māui made his famous hook for drawing the islands together. lit., Hina stomach passing coral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hina₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a goddess associated with Kū (upright), with whom she had incestuous relations. Hina in this instance means 'prostrate.' When gathering medicine with their left hands, people prayed to Hina for success. See Hikuikanahele, Kū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hina₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a goddess... Probably the most widely known goddess or demigoddess of Polynesia, frequently connected with the moon. Four well-known Hawaiian Hinas follow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hina₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wife of Akalana and mother of Māui. see Kaʻalaenuiahina and (HM 220).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hina₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mother of Kamapuaʻa by Kahikiʻula and referred to in chants by her mother, Kamaunuaniho, in order to save Kamapuaʻa in time of peril (FS 196-203). When she failed to recognize her pig son, Kamapuaʻa, in human form, she exposed herself in humiliation (FS 242-249).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hina₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wife of Wākea and the mother of the island of Molokaʻi, celebrated in the song Molokaʻi Nui a Hina, Great Molokaʻi Child of Hina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hinekū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hindu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hipakāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the star Aries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hiʻiakaikapoliopele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pele's favorite younger sister born from the mouth of Haumea rather than from the bosom, as were the many other Hiʻiaka sisters ((Westervelt p. 69), says there may have been forty sisters). Born as an egg, she was carried under Pele's bosom until she became a young beauty. She is the heroine of the epic concerning her trip from Kīlauea Volcano  to Kauaʻi  to find and fetch Pele's dream lover, Lohi'au; on her long and dangerous journey she transformed many evil moʻo into stones which are still visible (see PH). One of her forms was the palaʻā lace fern used to treat diseases and one of the first plants to grow on new lava. As the physician of the Pele family, she resuscitated Lohiʻau. She instituted the eating of fish from head to tail. She was worshiped by hula dancers. lit., Hiʻiaka in the bosom of Pele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hiʻiaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first part of the names of the twelve younger sisters of the goddess Pele; the youngest and most famous was Hiʻiakaikapoliopele. see (PH).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hiʻikua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star said to rise on the night of Hoaka and to vanish on the night of Muku in the month of Welehu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hiʻilawe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the highest waterfall in Hawaiʻi, and one of the highest in the world, with a vertical drop of about 300 m, at Waipiʻo Valley, Hawaiʻi. see (EM 49), for a famous song.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hiʻilei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star that rises and vanishes at the same times as Hiʻikua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>desire, delight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiaala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as the more common hiaʻā, indisposed to sleep, wakeful, sleepless...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiahia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faded, gray, hazy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hialaʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat heartily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hialele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>restless, furtive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hialoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>well trained, skilled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiamoe iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a little sleep, nap; to take a nap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiamoe loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to oversleep, sleep deeply; death, eternal sleep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiamoe paʻa loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fast asleep; deep sleep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>depression or hole, as under water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiapaʻiʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foremost, expert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pleased with, delighted with; delightful, pleasing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiaʻaiʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• greatly pleased or delighted, most delightful; 
   • appetite for delicious food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indisposed to sleep, wakeful, sleepless; insomnia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>attractive, distinguished, dignified, noble, becoming.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiehie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hie, attractive, distinguished, dignified, noble, becoming...; superb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of soft porous stone used to smooth and polish utensils; it is harder than the ʻana stone, which is used on wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hyena.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiena₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>speckled bird of prey. (And. Ier 12:9).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihi manō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>net made of strong cord used for shark fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihi pūnāwele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spider web, cobweb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihia kalaima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>criminal case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihia waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>civil case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihialou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a plant with small yellow flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihiawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the swamp fern (Ceratopteris thalictroides), an edible, somewhat succulent fern, distributed through the tropics. It grows in mud or water, as around taro patches, in tufts about 30 cm high. The fronds are triangular and are finely divided into long, narrow parts. Young fronds are eaten with fresh-water shrimps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• entangled, interwoven, involved, rank, snarled, snarl, entanglement, kink, 
   • perplexed, hampered, obscure and difficult to understand (Kep. 167); 
   • thicket, 
   • difficulty, problem, trouble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lawsuit or case before the court, trial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihihiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to come or go, of many people.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihihina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. and intensifier of hina, to fall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihikolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a legendary koa tree on Kauaʻi that was said to have no trunk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entanglement, spreading.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft whistling sound, gust or draft of wind; to whistle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihipeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• jungle, tangled thicket; 
   • entangled. 
   • fig., bewilderment, grief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihiu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild, untamed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihiu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rare, uncommon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a dream or vision (Kin. 15–1) , as while dozing; to dream while dozing; 
   • to whistle or sough, as wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to entangle, intertwine, intermingle; entanglement, 
   • creep, 
   • spread, 
   • web, 
   • snare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large-meshed fish net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tilt back, as the head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portion of the sky immediately above the horizon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to come ahead or beforehand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki nō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all right, O.K., certainly, surely, it can be done.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to come accidentally, alone, or without any particular purpose or reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>impossible, unable, can't or unable to do; inability, regrets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>names of cardinal directions, stars, and portions of the sky, perhaps because of movement (hiki₃) of the sun. see below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to aim carefully, as with stone, spear, or gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikialoalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>zenith.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikianakopili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spittle passed from a dying master, according to the belief that his knowledge was thereby handed on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikieʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large Hawaiian couch. lit., possible to mount.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikihiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to come repeatedly, as voices.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikihiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fetch repeatedly or a little at a time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikikiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lean back, relax.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikikiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread, as mist; to rain, especially a slanting rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikilele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jump or start from shock, to gasp; shock, perturbation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikimoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>west. lit., come to rest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikimua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>progress, advance; to progress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikina hema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>southeast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikina ʻākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>northeast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coming, advent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikipua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to force one's way, as through a crowd or undergrowth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikiwale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>easy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikiwawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quickly, speedily, suddenly, prompt, quickly done; possible to do quickly; doubletime (military command).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikiʻalamea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably the same as ikiʻalamea, a disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>next.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiki₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fetch, carry back and forth (less used than lawe).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tattoo brand on the forehead of a kauā outcast, or on the forehead of the caught seducer of a high chief's wife. (see (Malo 70, figure 1))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to throw aimlessly, carelessly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikuhiku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hikuhiku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>confusion of sounds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reel, lean or tilt sideways.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exalt, praise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hila₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hila₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tangled, confused; entanglement, confusion; to become entangled; to trip or fall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili hā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>four-strand braid; to braid thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili kolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a three-strand braid; to braid such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili pāhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>four-strand braid; to braid such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili pākolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>three-strand braid; to braid such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wander or grope aimlessly in the dark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiliau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in devious ways; to ramble; be indirect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilihili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark red or brown (less dark than hili₄).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilihua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grope here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed, snarled, entangled; to mix, snarl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilikua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lash against, whip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hit carelessly, at random.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilinaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to believe, trust; trust, confidence.
   • to lean on, rely on;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiliu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sound or call of a wind instrument, as the conch shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiliʻōʻū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>square braid of eight or sixteen strands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiliʻōʻū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ailment of the bowels or stomach, accompanied by gas pains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to braid or plait, as a lei  or candlenuts; a braid, plaiting, string.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn aside, deviate, miss the way, wander, stray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whip, smite, thrash, switch, bat; batter, as in baseball; stroke, as in fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hili₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bark used in dyeing, as hili kukui, hili kōlea, hili noni; the dark-brown dye made from this bark; a tapa dyed with hili; to dye with hili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilohilo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lengthen a speech or story by inserting new matter; to embroider or spin out a tale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilohilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet juice of ti root.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to twist, braid, spin; twisted, braided; threadlike; faint streak of light.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilo₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gonorrhea; a running sore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilo₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiluhilu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elegant, beautiful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>various species of reef fishes of the genus Coris. The name hilu may be qualified by the terms ʻeleʻele, lauwili, melemele, moelola, pano (probably same as uli), pāniʻo, pilikoʻa (Paracirrhites forsteri, hawkfish), ʻula, uli. See saying, noʻenoʻe₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quiet, reserved, well-behaved, decorous, unobtrusive, easygoing; such a person (a child born to a woman who craved hilu fish during her pregnancy was thought to be of this desirable type).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hilu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strange.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina leʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow favorably, as wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie down to sleep; to lie low, as of smoke; to drop dead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fall together, of several; to topple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina ulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to begin to gray, of hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina kahakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native Hawaiian plant of the water-leaf family (Nama sandwicensis). Niʻihau. cf. (Neal 712).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an unidentified plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina kū loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an unidentified plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina ʻaʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dusty miller (Artemisia stelleriana), a perennial herb in the daisy family, from northeastern Asia and eastern North America. The leaves and stems have a white, velvety covering and are aromatic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the silversword (Argyroxiphium sandwicense).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>florida moss (Tillandsia usneoides), an air plant, growing on tree branches and hanging baskets, forming masses of gray, thread-like stems and leaves. It is often substituted for the heliotrope (below) as the flower of Kahoʻolawe, and so called.  Also ʻāhinahina and ʻumiʻumi o Dole, Dole's Whiskers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native heliotrope (Heliotropium anomalum var. argenteum), a low, spreading beach plant, with narrow, clustered, silvery leaves and small, white, fragrant flowers. As designated by the Territorial legislature in 1923, it represents Kahoʻolawe in the leis of the islands; it is used for tea and medicine.  Called nohonoho puʻuone on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native geraniums (Geranium cuneatum var. tridens and other native silvery geraniums), shrubs or small trees of the high mountains, with ovate, toothed leaves and red or white flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native artemisia (Artemisia australis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinahina₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, gray-green with a rosy flush, the whole covered with a wax bloom; pith dark brown; looks like lahi₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of stone laid near the coral pile (umu) to attract fish; it was flat on one side and rounded on the other, and was believed to attract manini and young of other fish which resembled it in color. lit., white gray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinakā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handkerchief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinakā paʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pocket handkerchief. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinakā ʻāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neckerchief. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of ʻoʻopu, a fish, formerly caught in nets and greatly relished.  See saying, pā ʻili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of pāʻū (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinapē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>too weak to stand alone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinapū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare native variety of upland taro, with green leaves, reddish leaf juncture (piko), dark-green petioles, and white corm. Perhaps same as lauloa uliuli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinapū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>italics, probably so called because italics slant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow in a straight course, of wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray- or white-haired; gray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hina₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hin (a Hebrew measure).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gaudy, showy, splendid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinehineʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a moss listed by (Rock).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, feeble, delicate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinihini konouli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a land shell (Succinea casta orophila).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinihini kua mauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a land shell (Succinea casta).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinihini ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>air upland moss (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinihini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indistinct, faint, as a voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinihini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of land shell. see hinihini konouli, hinihini kua mauna.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinihini₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cooked greens, as of ʻāheahea, pōpolo, pakai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• oil, grease, ointment; 
   • oily, greasy; 
   • smooth and polished, lustrous, slick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinuhinu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intensification of hinu,  smooth and polished, lustrous, slick
   • bright, shining, lustrous, 
   • glossy, 
   • glittering, as of polished stones or shells; 
   • splendid; splendor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinupuaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as maiʻa ʻeleʻele or ʻeleʻele, a mountain banana with shiny black trunk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hinupuaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of upland taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiohio haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jibber jabber in the white man's language, so called because English seemed full of whistling (hiohio), sibilant sounds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiohio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whistle softly; to blow softly, draw in the breath, as of one eating hot food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiohio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gibberish; to jabber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiohio₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lure for trolling, said to be named for its whistling sound tripping over the water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tumble down, 
   • collapse;  
   • falling.
   • landslide,
   • overthrown, 
   • defeated;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leaning, slanting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sweep or gust of wind; to blow in gusts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inside corners of a house, said to be so named because ghosts came whistling in at the corners.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hio₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break wind silently.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hipa keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lamb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hipa kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ram. lit., male sheep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hipahipa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hip, hip, hurrah! Cheers! (Eng., hip.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hipa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sheep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hipopokamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hippopotamus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resting place, as in the shelter of a tree or cave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game something like checkers, played on a board with five squares.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>menstrual.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiuhiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• redup. of hiu₁, to throw or fling violently...; 
   • redup. of hiu₂,  to elevate, hoist, as by block and tackle...;  
   • to pelt repeatedly; 
   • to tug, lift again and again...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to throw or fling violently; 
   • to haul energetically with ropes; 
   • to get into action, as play or sport; 
   • to pursue with energy, as love-making.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to elevate, hoist, as by block and tackle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stones used in games of kōnane, kinipeki, and āneo, usually polished and flat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwa lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>esteemed chief; beloved child or favorite; royal favorite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwa paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coal-black, entirely black, solid-black. (A puaʻa hiwa might have a few white hairs, but none at all were on a puaʻa hiwa paʻa.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwahiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>precious, beloved, esteemed, petted, darling, indulged; favorite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an all-black pig with white hoofs and white tips of tail, ears, and nose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entirely black, as of pigs offered to the gods, a desirable blackness contrasting with uli and ʻeleʻele, which have pejorative connotations. see polohiwa and its associations with the god Kāne₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a term qualifying coconuts and kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwihiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. and intensifier of hiwi₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skinny, bony, thin, angular.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiwi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp ridge of a mountain. cf. more common kuahiwi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fall sideways, lean, slant, slope, incline, leaning, oblique, diagonal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiōhiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lean every which way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻa kā ʻupena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shuttle or needle for making a fish net, sometimes of bone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻali₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>food offering to the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻali₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir, as a fire; to signal with the hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻaloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bald temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻanakiʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stems by which tubers are attached to vines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make fire with the fire-plow; the act of making fire thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shuttle or needle for making nets; to knot or fasten the meshes of a net; to form a network; to bind, as house rafters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻi kala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hook used for kala, a fish, and baited with kala, a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻiaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare variety of taro with bronze-red leaf and stem, used in medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻialo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carried in the arms, as a beloved child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻialo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nearby, in front.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻikua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carried on the shoulders, as a beloved child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻikua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in back, far.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻilani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to nurse or care for, as an infant; to admire, exalt, praise, extol in poetry; praise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻilawe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lift, carry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻilei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry, tend, and cherish a beloved child (lei ).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻimoʻopuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bear a grandchild in the arms; to be a grandparent (a term of pride and affection).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻipaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to care for a child; to instruct a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻipoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tend, feed, cherish, as a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hold or carry in the arms, as a child;    • to bear;    • to nurse or tend a child (Hawaiians did not carry children unrelated to them, and commoners did not touch a chief's child; carrying a child symbolized love, kinship, and affection). cf:
    Hiʻiaka, first part of the names of the twelve younger sisters of the goddess Pele...
    hiʻialo, carried in the arms, as a beloved child...
    hiʻikua, carried on the shoulders, as a beloved child...
    hiʻilani, to nurse or care for, as an infant...
    hiʻilei, to carry, tend, and cherish a beloved child...
    hiʻimoʻopuna, to bear a grandchild in the arms...
    hiʻipaka, to care for a child...
    hiʻipoi, to tend, feed, cherish, as a child...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall, as cliff or mountain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻohiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruddy, bright red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻohiʻolani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to level off, as a flower bed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻohiʻona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• features, as of a face or landscape; 
   • sight, aspect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻolani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sleep, lie at ease, lounge, relax (this word sometimes replaces moe in poetry because moe suggests the sleep of death).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general appearance, as of a person; impression.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻu kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a single fishtail. fig., limited knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻu waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe stern. fig., a straight tree suitable for a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻuhiʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>last bits of odds and ends; remnants of matting strips that must be cut off after plaiting is finished; ends of knots in plaiting; wispy end of a braid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻuiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishtail fern (Nephrolepis biserrata cv. furcans), a kind of sword fern, with forked divisions (pinnae). In Kaʻū, leis are made by combining pinnae of this fern (or whole frond) with flower sprays of wāpine (lemon verbena).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻukole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fresh-water ʻoʻopu fish with a pinkish tail (hiʻu kole). It is taboo to some because it is believed related to the moʻo lizard gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻukā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whole fish used as bait for trolling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻuwai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water purification festivities on the second night of the month of Welehu (near the end of the year). The people bathed and frolicked in the sea or stream after midnight, then put on their finest tapa and ornaments for feasting and games.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻuwai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water-tailed," said of one allegedly descended from a shark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻuwīwī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of ʻahi, a tuna fish. lit., thin tail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hind part or tail section of a fish, considered less delicious than the head or front section. See saying, pau₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caudal fin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hiʻu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to motion with the hands in a way destructive to the addressee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second day of the month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hokenekoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hottentot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night of the full moon. When this moon set before daylight it was called Hoku Palemo, Hoku that slips away. When it set after daylight it was called Hoku Ili grounded Hoku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Holoholopīnaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, perhaps Mars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Holoholoʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Holoikahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a legendary star (Kep. 77) that guided Hawaiʻinui on his return to Kahikihonuakele after discovering Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Holopoʻopoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind famous at Waipiʻo, Hawaiʻi. lit., running in the hollows.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Holu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Holu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a fish god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Home Rula Republalika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>semi-weekly newspaper in Hawaiian and Eng. published 1901–02.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hono-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bay, gulch, valley (as a part of place names such as Honolulu, Honokōhau, Honoliʻi, Honomanu; also in the poetic phrase nā Honō a Piʻilani, the bays beginning with Hono- of Piʻilani [a chief who ruled the bays on Maui, Molokaʻi, and Lānaʻi that were visible from Lahaina]. Hana- occurs similarly as in Hanalei and Hanauma.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Honokaona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hong Kong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Honokaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>town name, Hāmākua, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Honolulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the capital city in the Hawaiian Islands lit., sheltered bay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoʻoheu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a strong wind threatening to be a gale
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoʻohokuikalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the daughter of Wākea and Papa, the ancestors of the Hawaiians. Wākea instituted taboo nights so that he might sleep with Hoʻohoku. The root -hoku may be cognate with Tahitian hotu, to produce fruit, and Tongan fotu, to appear; if so, the translation would be 'to bear fruit in the heavens'.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoʻolapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind famous at Kaʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoʻoleia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoʻolua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a strong, north wind associated with Makaiwa, Kauaʻi; Hāna, Maui; and Hālawa, Molokaʻi. At Hālawa the name may be qualified by Iho, Kaʻi, Kele, Pehu, Wahakole
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoʻomālama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hoʻāo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night of the day called Huna₃, eleventh night of the month, when the hoʻāo nuptials took place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ho-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marker of the caus/sim.; same as hoʻo-, but commonly found before words beginning with a glottal stop followed by a long vowel, as ʻāpuka, hoʻāpuka.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>companion of a chief, fellow chief, chief descended from the god Kāne. fig., the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fellow worker, colleague, partner, accomplice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa hanauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>relative of one's own generation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa haumana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>schoolmate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>traveling companion, fellow traveler. (In (Ios. 14.8)  "kou hoa hele" seems to be the Hawaiian translation of "my brethren.")
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa holomoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shipmate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kamaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>childhood playmate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fellow man.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• fellow soldier, 
   • enemy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>companion of a god, godly companion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coauthor, writing associate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kākoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ally, supporter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kāunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lover, delightful companion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa kūkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>consultant, counselor, adviser, one with whom one confers and deliberates.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa lawe pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharer, partner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa lawehana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fellow laborer or worker, helper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa like₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>companion or contemporary of equal status.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoa aliʻi, companion of a chief, fellow chief, chief descended from the god Kāne...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa loaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fellow sharer, receiver, partaker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa luhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fellow worker, especially one helping to rear a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa lumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roommate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa makaʻāinana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fellow citizen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sleeping companion, bedfellow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa paio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opponent, antagonist, adversary, enemy, rival.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa paʻahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fellow worker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>close, intimate, or personal friend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa pāonioni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>enemy, contestant, rival.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa pāʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>playmate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa una</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one accompanying a messenger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa waʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe companion, mate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa waʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe rigging, tackle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eating or dinner companion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa ʻinau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweetheart, mate, spouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>companion with whom one converses or consults.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoahoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rounded tapa beater (also called hohoa, pepehi); rapid beating, striking, as of tapa or pandanus leaves; a stick beater for washing clothes. fig., bad-tempered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoahoaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>comb of a rooster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoahui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>associate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joining, suture, joint. cf. hoa₂, and below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoai kala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lambdoidal suture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoai kaupaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sagital suture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoai maha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporal suture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoai manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coronal suture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka kākala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a disease (ruptured appendix?).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka ʻīpuka hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruptured appendix, appendicitis (not certain).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoakakala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bracelet of tusks of hog or dog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoakakeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arch over a door, lintel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• crescent; 
   • arch, as over door of ancient house (Kep. 101); 
   • crescent-shaped design at base of temple drum; 
   • crest, as on a helmet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• brightness; shining, glittering, to glitter, shine, 
   • splendid; 
   • flash as lightning, 
   • become daylight; 
   • to flame. 
   • fig., glory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cast a shadow; 
   • to brandish, as a spear (2-Sam. 23.18) , 
   • to drive away, ward off, frighten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open, as the mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirit, apparition, ghost.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaka₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disease of the abdomen, perhaps appendicitis, rupture (followed by a qualifier). see hoaka ʻīpuka hale, hoaka kākala. Other qualifiers reported are hāwele, kū, kū kahi, kū lua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoalauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neighbor, close associate or friend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoana kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grindstone, rolling grindstone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hone, whetstone, grindstone; to rub, grind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to brandish, as a whip; to threaten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joining, joint, binding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoaʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenant, caretaker, as on a kuleana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tie, bind, 
   • secure, 
   • rig; rigging, 
   • lashing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike with a stick or club; to club; a club.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoe kala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a paddle with a blade narrower than the hoe nanue. lit., pointed paddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoe nenue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of paddle named for nenue fish, with broad and round blade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoe uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steering paddle or oar, rudder, helm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>let's get started, go ahead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoeamāui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably same as ʻēkaha ʻula fern, but according to some it is Elaphoglossum pellucidum, a smaller Elaphoglossum than the ʻēkaha ʻula. lit., Māui's paddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoehaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• same as ʻoehaʻa
      • crooked, distorted, deformed; 
      • to walk in an ungainly manner, swaying the shoulders; 
      • to waddle. 
      • fig., deceitful; trick.
   • fig., unreliable, unstable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoehoene₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pierce the ear lobes with acid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoehoene₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poor, destitute, sick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoehoepākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name for a Niʻihau pāwehe design in plaiting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoehoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paddling back and forth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoehoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a plaintive prolonged sound, as of the nose flute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoehoe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shoulder blade (used after iwi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir, poke, as a fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paddling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoene₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a soft sweet sound, as of song; to sound softly, rustle, sough, as the wind
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoene₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to use a douche or enema; enema, medicine, injection, abortion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw in the breath and expel it with a whistling sound, as when tired.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird reported by (Kep) as being the size of the ʻōʻō and black and gray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hohiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Dryopteris glabra) with rather finely divided fronds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hohoiea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wheezy. cf. (For. 4:169).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hohola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread out, unfold, unfurl, as tapa, mats, clouds, wings; to extend, stretch, diffuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hohonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep, profound; depth, soundings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hohopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall, thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hohō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to snore, snort, bray, heehaw, splash, gurgle, breathe hard, draw in mucus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoi kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native vine (Smilax sandwicensis), growing wild in the mountains; the leaves are heart-shaped, shiny, with longitudinal veins, much like the hoi but bearing tendrils; the roots are tuberous and not palatable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau name of a sea tern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bitter yam (Dioscorea bulbifera, synonym D. sativa), a vine with cylindrical stem, heart-shaped leaves, small tuberous root, round aerial tubers. The tubers, used only in times of famine, need long washing to make them fit to eat. Called piʻoi on Kauaʻi. (HP 167), (Neal 230).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hokahokai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mix, as ingredients.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hokaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strain kava; a kava strainer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to squeeze, strain, as kava or liquids through fibers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mule, ass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barren, of a woman. (modern).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fat, fleshy, as thighs, buttocks, or calf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike, threaten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hokua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• nape of the neck, shoulders (Puk. 12.34) ; 
   • main stem of a vine (Kep. 157).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hokua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tip of high waves, crest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hokua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lift up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hola₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drug fish with ʻauhuhu (a small legume with pods used for poisoning fish). Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hola₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>groin (rare, in chants, (Kam. 64.124))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hole iʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to groove or carve figures in the iʻe tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hole ʻie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip aerial roots of the ʻieʻie vine for baskets or plaiting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holehole iwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip flesh from the bones, as formerly done with the dead, fig., to tell evil of one's relatives or reveal confidences.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holehole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mix different feathers in a lei ; mingling, as feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holelola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Holy Roller [disparaging and offensive term for a member of a Pentacostal sect].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to skin, 
   • peel, 
   • file, rasp, 
   • make a groove; 
   • to strip, as sugar-cane leaves from the stalk; 
   • furrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to squirm, twist, turn, fidget; to caress passionately.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, spindly, puny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rippled surface of the sea, as caused by fish; undulation or vibration ...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>immature and inferior, as breadfruit falling prematurely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sprout, as plants or a youth's beard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ask indirectly, seek to open conversation, search.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steam-driven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run to and fro; bustle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo hōlua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>course for hōlua, sledding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo i mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to progress, advance, surpass, go ahead; progress, advancement; successful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ride in a car or carriage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo kūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trot, as a horse; to jounce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo leʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to succeed, fare well; successful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ride horseback; horseman, rider.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to run, sail, move in two ways. 
   • fig., hypocrite; deceitful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to decide, determine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo paheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to skate, skid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass off successfully, succeed, accomplish; successful; success.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo puni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sail or travel around, circumnavigate; everywhere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo pupule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reckless, mad running; to tear madly, as a frightened horse; to speed recklessly, as an auto.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo pāʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ride horseback while wearing the sarong known as pāʻū; a pāʻū rider.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>food bundle, especially ti-leaf bundle of hard poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speed recklessly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo ʻāʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run about in a panic...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sheath covering coconut flowers; spathe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holohau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ice skate, ski. lit., ice run.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holohiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dart this way and that, as children at play; to veer at an angle, miss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholo kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go for a drive or ride. see song in (EM 53–4).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholo lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go horseback riding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholokake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blown, as by wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholomoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ocean trip, cruise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholona hiamoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sloth, sleeping animal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholona lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insect, flying creature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholona ʻai weuweu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>herbivorous animal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholona ʻai ʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carnivorous animal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a trip, excursion, ride.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholoʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gossip, slander, bear tales, tattle; tattler, talebearer, spreader of gossip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>basting; to baste, sew.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a net into which fish run (holoholo) after being frightened; to fish with this net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoholo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an old Hawaiian game of kicking a ball to which feathers were attached; to play this game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holohuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glance off, fly off obliquely, miss, fail to hit the mark. lit., run edge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoi lauoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shampoo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sailor; to sail to foreign lands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seaman, seafarer; to sail on the sea; sea voyage or cruise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>not secure, loose, not tight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dart, as a bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run or sail swiftly; headlong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upper edge of an ʻōpelu fish net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run here and there; helter-skelter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokū kua poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a round-yoked holokū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a loose, seamed dress with a yoke and usually with a train, patterned after the Mother Hubbards of the missionaries. cf. the muʻumuʻu, which formerly was not yoked and has no train or seam. Both garments are frequently made of gaily patterned material.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloak (Isa. 59.17) , mantle (Hal. 109.29) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holokū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>evenly plump, stout and symmetrical.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hololani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mission.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hololeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to correspond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holomakani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breezy, airy. lit., wind running.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holomoku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sailor, passenger, anyone who sails; to sail, take a sail or ocean trip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holomoku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rush or torrent, as of water; to rush, break forth, overflow. fig., overwhelming.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holomua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>improvement, progress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holomū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long fitted dress, a combination of holokū and muʻumuʻu, a name probably coined after World War II.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a running, sailing, traveling; performance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a double bar to show the end of a piece of music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holopani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pain that nearly shuts off (pani) the breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holopapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• shelf, ledge, rack, 
   • frame on which tapa and other articles were laid; 
   • flooring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holopapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread, overrun, prevail, overcome, control, defeat; everywhere, completely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holopeki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trot. lit., pace (Eng.) run.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holouka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>draft, air current, as in the mountains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water ditch or course; to run in such courses; watery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowaʻa lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>form or mold, as for making adobe bricks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowaʻaʻōwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>powder horn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trough, especially vessel in which kava was mixed; oblong box, coffin, chest, cradle; furrow, as for planting sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sheath covering coconut flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowaʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shuttle into which the bobbin of a sewing machine is slipped after it is filled with thread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowaʻa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fish net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thrust through a cleft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>war engine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holowī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long, thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoāiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to swim like a fish; 
   • to get the bends;  the bends, caisson disease.
   • to drown, 
   • to sink;   •
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flow like water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoʻanai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gallop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holoʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• whole, entire, complete, 
   • total, all, 
   • absolute, altogether; 
   • entirely; 
   • paramount, supreme; 
   • entity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decided, determined, agreed upon, settled, approved, passed, enacted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>running hula step to the side; similar to kāholo except that the feet are not necessarily brought together
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long bundle, as of hard poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sew, as a break in a gourd calabash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>holes in edge of a canoe, through which lashings were passed to hold a canoe cover in place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diagonal pole or strut attached to the inner side of the roof framework and extending obliquely from the upper end of a rafter at one corner to the lower end of the rafter at the other corner; diagonal brace. see illus. 1, illus. 4
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holo₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loss of a pebble in the kōnane game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holu nape</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sway, wave; swaying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer for luakini dedication.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holuholu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flexible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to oppress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• springy, pliable, resilient, as a mattress; 
   • to sway, as palm fronds; 
   • to ripple, as waves; 
   • to play back and forth; 
   • bumpy, as an airplane ride.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>holāholā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blossom, as a flower or adolescent growing into maturity. Kaʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>homa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disappointed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>homa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, flabby; hollow, as cheeks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>homa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hold a canoe to its course in a rough sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>homa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beat of paddle on canoe side, as in rhythmic paddling while fish are driven into a net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>home hoʻokūʻonoʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>homestead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>home hoʻopaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>detention home.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>home lula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>home rule; the name of the political party composed of native Hawaiians formed in the early years of Hawaiʻi as a territory. This party ended in 1912 after Kuhiō was elected delegate to Congress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>homeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sand lizard (RSV), snail (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>homeopakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>homeopathic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honehone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>melodious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honekakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honeysuckle, a low, twining shrub (Lonicera japonica), from East Asia, with shortstemmed, oval leaves and fragrant tubular flowers that open white and turn yellow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honekoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>saucy, impudent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hone₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sweet and soft, as music; to sound softly; 
   • sweetly appealing, as perfume or a memory of love; 
   • to tease, play pranks; 
   • mischievous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hone₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hone₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenon of a wall post.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honi lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to throw a kiss; such a kiss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honi pāhaʻohaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a "puzzling" smell: said if the smell is out of place, as that of gardenias in a canoe at sea, interpreted as a warning of danger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honihoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to kiss or smell repeatedly, sniff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honikā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a loud kiss; to kiss loudly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a tapa dyed with turmeric and worn as a sarong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smell, sniff, scent; a scent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to touch, as a match to a combustible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hono makani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>windbreak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honohina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild spiderflower (Gynandropsis gynandra), a cosmopolitan tropical hairy annual weed, native to Africa, in the caper family, 30 to 90 cm high, leaves five-parted; flowers spider-like, white with a purple tinge; fruit narrow, cylindrical capsule with many seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honohono kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the basket grass (Oplismenus hirtellus), a creeping grass that originated in America, called kukui because it is often found under kukui trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honohono kū mau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of honohono₂ [wandering Jew, dayflower]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honohono ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wandering Jew or zebrina, an ornamental, now naturalized, native to Mexico (Zebrina pendula).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honohono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the wandering Jew or dayflower (Commelina diffusa), known in many temperate and tropical countries, a creeping weed, rooting at the joints, and bearing grasslike, ovate leaves and small bright-blue flowers. Also honohono wai, and mākolokolo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honohono₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a very rare native mint (Haplostachys haplostachya), a downy erect herb with oblong or narrower leaves and white flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honohono₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a children's game; the child locked fingers of two hands and thrust them into the sand, letting the sand out through a small opening.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honokaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cavern, sea cave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honokoī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hard lump beside the mons pubis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mischievous, teasing; to tease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honopū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mob, angry crowd.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honoā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kūkae, excrement, and an insulting epithet for commoners.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stitch, sew,    • mend, patch;    • a joining, as of mountains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• back of the neck,
   • brow of a cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hono₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bad smelling (less common than hohono).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hono₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rite at the end of kapu loulu rituals during which chiefs sat without shifting positions while a kahuna prayed for as long as an hour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honu kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tortoise, perhaps the introduced land tortoise of the genus Gopherus. lit., foreign turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honu māeaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honu peʻekue₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of thick-shelled turtle. lit., coarse turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honu peʻekue₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crowded, thick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honu poʻo kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of turtle. lit., white-headed turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honu ʻea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hawksbill turtle (Chelonia); the shell of this turtle was used as medicine for the disease called ʻea and was used for combs and fans.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honua nalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>base of a breaker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honuaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, a dark brown-red mutant of manulele, with purple leaf sheaths and leaves. (HP 221, 225).  It was formerly used in medicine, and is one of the best canes for eating raw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suddenly, abruptly and without reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>middle section of a canoe; central section of a canoe fleet, as fishing iheihe fish; main section, as of an army.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honuhonu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game in which player and opponent sat with legs crossed and tried to unseat each other; to play this game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honuhonu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game in which one boy sat astride the back of another who was down on all fours; to play this game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honuhonu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tapa pattern said to have its surface raised in ridges like corduroy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>honu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a design for Niʻihau mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hooleaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old spelling for hōʻole + ai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope haʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>object of a sentence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope kiaʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lieutenant governor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>substitute or assistant teacher.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope pelekikena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vice-president.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acting or deputy head, director, leader.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope puʻukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>assistant or deputy treasurer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>assignee (term in will 303, 1875, State Archives).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopena alahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>railroad terminus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>result, conclusion, sequel, ending, destiny, fate, consequence, effect, last.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopeʻaʻei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>part of an ʻōpelu net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopeʻeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., pain-inflicting rear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopeʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wasp, yellow jacket, hornet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• result, consequence, 
   • conclusion, end, 
   • purpose, 
   • sequel, supplement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deputy, substitute, assistant, adjutant, representative, surety, successor, proxy, acting officer, supporter, vice-, agent, factor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>posterior, buttocks. tail (of a plane) (HE)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hope₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second brew of kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopilole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat slowly, as an invalid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopohopo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• anxiety, anxious, 
   • uncertainty, uncertain, doubt, in doubt, 
   • fright; fearful, 
   • perturbed, alarmed, uneasy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitive form of hopo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopuna ʻōlelo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pronunciation, enunciation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopuna ʻōlelo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paragraph.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopuna ʻōlelo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>syllable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopuna₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grasping, seizing, taking; arrest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopuna₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pronunciation, accent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seize, grasp, take, catch, capture, arrest; seizure, taking, arrest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hopūʻali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gird, compress; grooved
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hou kui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>injection needle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hou pahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stab with a knife.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hou puka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drill a hole, bore or pierce through.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>houhewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn this way and that, as in panic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>houhou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup of hou₃, to push, thrust, pierce...;  fig., to make cutting or cruel remarks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>houpo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• diaphragm, 
   • chest, 
   • solar plexus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>houpo lewalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sagging chest;  
   •  hunger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>houpo ʻume pau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong pulsation in solar plexis, heart attack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hou₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to push, thrust, poke, shove, 
   • stab, pierce, prick, 
   • plunge, ram, jab, 
   • drill, bore, 
   • inject.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hou₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perspiration, sweat; to perspire, sweat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hou₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>varieties of wrasse (Thalassoma) shallow-water fish, as T. purpureum. The following names have been recorded for the young stages of the hou: ʻāwela, kanaloa, ʻōlali, ʻōlani, pāhouhou, pakaiele, pakaueloa, palaeʻa, pāʻouʻou.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoāluka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bring together, collect. caus/sim of ʻāluka, crowd, heap; mixed, crowded, heaped...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻ-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marker of the caus/sim.; same as hoʻo-, but commonly found before words beginning with a- or e- (or sometimes i-), with lengthening of the first vowel of the word, as ano, hoʻāno; emi, hoʻēmi; inu, hoʻīnu, or before words beginning with a long vowel, as ō, hoʻō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻaikāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be a friend, make friends, befriend
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of alo, front, face, presence; upper surface, as of a bowl; leeward...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻanapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻanapa, to shine, gleam, glitter, flash, sparkle; brightness, gleam...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻanuanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of anuanu, redup. of anu, cold; chilly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to kindle, light
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻeaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to approach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go back, return, retreat, revert, backslide, deteriorate morally. (In (Ier. 3.22)  hoʻi hope seems to be the translation of "faithless" and "faithlessness" and in (Ier. 6.28)  the translation of "revolter.")
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi hou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go or come back, return.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi hou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>repeat sign in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go or come with no thought of returning; to go permanently.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻihoʻi ea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>restoration, as of sovereignty; to restore sovereignty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very, great (often written as two words).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>returning, coming back; return.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>farewell gift, as to a parting guest after a feast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻioʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻioʻiole, mousy, like a rat...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻiʻimo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blink rapidly; to twinkle, to cause a twinkling
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enter, as an institution or last resting place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a parting chant to which hula dancers dance as they leave the audience.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marriage of a chief with the daughter of a brother or sister; to do so (a means of increasing the rank of the offspring).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intensifying preceding base.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>also, too, besides.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻi₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>expressing doubt, uncertainty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻmāhū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behave like a homosexual or hermaphrodite
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻo-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a very active former of caus/sim. derivatives. hoʻo- is treated as a prefix because it occurs only before bases; unlike prefixes, however, it takes the stress of a word, as does the following base; thus hoʻouna, to send, bears stress on the u and on the first o. hoʻo- usually precedes stems beginning with the vowels i- and u- and all the consonants except the glottal stop. important meanings follow...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻo-₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>causation and transitivization, as pono, correct; hoʻoponopono, to correct.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻo-₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pretense, as kuli, deaf; hoʻokuli, to feign deafness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻo-₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similarity, as kamaliʻi, children; hoʻoka maliʻi, childish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻo-₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>no meaning, as kāholoholo, to hurry; hoʻokāholoholo, to hurry. The meanings of some hoʻo- derivatives are quite different from the meanings of the stems, as maikaʻi, good; hoʻomaikaʻi, to congratulate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoahiahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻāhiahi: to become evening; to spend an evening; to detain until evening; to darken, obscure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cast a shadow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻāla, to awaken someone
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of  alo, front, face, presence; upper surface, as of a bowl; leeward...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make measurements, rearrange, put in order. also hoʻāna.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a plant or slip to take root; to take root.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ehu₂, same as ehuehu₂ thriving...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻoweke, to open. (weke₁,  crack, narrow opening... )
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaehae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of haehae₂, redup. of hae₁ wild...
   • to drive into a fury; 
   • to decoy uhu fish by tying an uhu to a line;
   • to tease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make wild or savage; to provoke, tease, exasperate, stir up wrath
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to bark, growl, scold
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohahai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to follow, entice; to pretend to follow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to create heat; to rouse to fury
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohahauhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be struck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to parade, strut
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overcast, calm
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smooth, level off; to give a purge; cathartic purge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a less violent grimace than haikaika; to make faces, cause to make faces
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause, produce a recollection or premonition; to challenge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to assume a ghostly form; dim
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make openings holes, spaces; to create space; full of holes. fig., hungry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohakahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full of openings and spaces; to make open spaces, holes
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohakakā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provoke a fight
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohakanū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause silence; silent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as haku, dominate; to treat as a haku; to rule others, sometimes without authority; bossy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pack full, cram, push; to break, as a boil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hakū, rising, bulging; bulge; to rise, as the moon...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohala manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass the time, agreeably or otherwise; to loaf; pastime
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohalahala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to criticize, complain, find fault, complaint; critical.
   • correct, correction, 
   • negotiate (rare),
   • suggest;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to sin, lead astray; 
   • to fail to do
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to miss; to dodge, turn aside; 
   • to pass, as time
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lodge in a house; to receive in a house
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohale kipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to entertain, as a guest or friend; hospitable
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohale papaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to convert into a storehouse; to store in a house; to serve as a storehouse
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohalehale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of halehale, high, towering, as a housetop, cliff, or waves; cavernous. fig., emptiness, hunger...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to carry
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaliʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to evoke reminiscence or recollection; remembrance; to remind
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of halu, same as puhalu, uhalu,  soft, flabby, loose, sagging, sunken...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohalulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as halulu₁; to produce a roaring noise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hamo₁, anointed, smeared; to anoint, stain, rub, as with oil; to besmear, plaster, stroke gently, pet, fondle, caress...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohamohamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hamohamo, redup. of hamo₁, to pat...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to use, employ, cause to work, carry out, administer, manage, encourage; use, employment, management, administration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tease, provoke, nag, plague; one who teases or provokes
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to touch, 
   • graze, 
   • hint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohanini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overflow, etc.;  to cause an overflow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻohanohano, to honor, exalt, glorify; to conduct oneself with distinction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohanohano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to honor, exalt, glorify; to conduct oneself with distinction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to breathe, resuscitate, administer an inhalant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohanuhanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻohanu to cause to breathe, resuscitate, administer an inhalant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hao₄, to come with force, as wind or rain; to do with force and energy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of haoa₃, same as haoa puhi, gorge used for catching eels...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act like a white person, to ape the white people, or assume airs of superiority
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lessen, diminish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohape</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hape₁, incorrect, faulty, inaccurate; to break, transgress...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hauhau₁ redup. of hau₃, to hit...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohauhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause confusion, as in speech. caus/sim of hauhili₁, same as hilikau mixed, snarled, entangled...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaukaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spoil, as a ballot. fig., to defile a reputation. caus/sim of haukaʻe, stained, smeared, smudged, defaced, sordid; to besmirch, stain, smear...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaumia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pollute, defile, befoul, besmirch, contaminate...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaumāna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as a pupil, become a pupil; to make pupils of
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause an offensive odor; to use strong-smelling bait to attract fish; to smell such an odor
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaunaele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provoke panic, riot; agitator.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaunuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proud
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohauwawā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>provocative of loud noise. caus/sim of hauwawā, medley of simultaneous talking...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohauwene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tease others. caus/sim of hauwene, to cry, tease, nag, fret...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohauʻoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause happiness, entertain, gaiety, joy; have fun, do fun things. (NKE)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohawaiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as a Hawaiian; to ape or imitate Hawaiians
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lower; humble. see the more common hoʻohaʻahaʻa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻahaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lower, debase, humiliate, humble (Kanl. 8.2), disgrace, underrate, belittle; humble, lowly, modest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻaheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act haughty. caus/sim of haʻaheo, proud, haughty; to strut; to cherish with pride; pride, vanity, haughtiness...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻalele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to quit or leave; to cause to quit
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻalulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of haʻalulu, to shake, quake, totter, tremble, quiver...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of haʻanui, to boast, brag, exaggerate, gloat...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻihaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break, as waves. caus/sim of haʻihaʻi₁, brittle;  limbering exercises, as for the hula; massage in chiropractic; quavering; breaking, rising and falling of the voice; a style of singing with a breaking voice; to break, as a law...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻilua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flirt; loose jointed. see -haʻilua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a break
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of haʻi₄, coquettish, flirtatious; to flirt...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohaʻohaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to arouse wonder, surprise, puzzlement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohehelo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hehelo, reddish, bright, showy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohehelo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proud, especially of one's appearance or dress
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohehena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hehena, insane, raving mad, crazy, possessed; insanity, madness; lunatic, maniac...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swish, swirl; to swish up and down on the foot, as a child, toss up. caus/sim of heheo, a swaggering or swishing walk; swishing, as of a skirt; to whirl, swish, strut...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to melt, liquefy, 
   • cast, 
   • dissolve, 
   • soften; 
   • to slide, especially to slide by jerks, as on a hōlua, sled, or ti-leaf slide.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to snare, tangle, rope, lasso; 
   • to beset with difficulties; 
   • to infatuate, be enraptured
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheihei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run swiftly, take part in a race, pretend to race, cause to race
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheihei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to ensnare, entrap; 
   • to mend, as a net or wire fence
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheihei₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fascinate, flirt; to ward off possible sorcery by imitating the gestures of the kahuna. caus/sim of heihei₃, to enthrall, enchant...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheihei₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beat, as a heiau drum; sound of heiau drum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohekili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause thunder; threatening thunder storm
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohelehele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to help someone walk, as a child; to take walking, as a dog
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohelehele ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lead up to a subject in a roundabout way, hint, suggest
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohelei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of helei₁, to straddle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohelei₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pull down, as the eyelid; to stretch, as the mouth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheleleʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter, sow; to fall, as rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to move, set in motion; to start, as a clock; to manage; to walk someone else or force oneself to walk
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to imitate, pretend; imitative, pretending
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>numerator, in fractions; a telling, explanation. caus/sim of helu₁, to count, number, compute...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohemahema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to neglect, not care for; careless, negligent, defective, deficient, ignorant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to loosen, undo, unfasten, disconnect, take off, set at liberty, liberate, free, abort.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohemohemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take off. caus/sim of hemohemo, separation, loosening...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohemolele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make holy; to feign holiness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohemū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drive off, scare away, as hens
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to see, feel, or handle the hena, mons pubis; to take off one's clothing and expose the hena
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohenehene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tease, laugh at, jeer, banter, ridicule.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohenoheno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lovable. caus/sim of henoheno, lovable, sweet...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheno₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cherish, love, caress; affectionate, demonstrative of affection; expression of affection, as a song
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheno₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decorative plaiting on mat, fan; to decorate thus
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proud, vaunting, vain; to show off, boast
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>misconstrue. caus/sim of hepa, idiot, moron, imbecile; partial paralysis of the vocal organs causing indistinct articulation; feebleminded, moronic...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohepahepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hepahepa, redup. of hepa, idiot, moron, imbecile...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bleach
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow, sprout, germinate; pubescence. caus/sim of heu, down or fine hair, fuzz, loose fibers on certain fruits or leaves, quicksilver or mercury on back of a mirror, hairlike growths or spines on sugar cane stalks or cactus; fuzzy, downy; to begin to grow...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause one to do wrong, cause or feign a mistake; to blame, condemn (cf. the more common hoʻāhewa, to condemn)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohewahewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mat mesh, twill plaiting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohewahewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fail to recognize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheʻeheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻoheʻe; slide (by jerks), slip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoheʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to slip, slide, flee;
   • to put to flight, rout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hia, desire, delight...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiahia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hiahia₂, var. of hiehie, redup. of hie, attractive, distinguished...; superb...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohialaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hialaʻai₁, same as hiaʻai, pleased with, delighted with; delightful, pleasing...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiamoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put to sleep, lull to sleep, to pretend to sleep; soporific.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have the privileges of a first-born; to act as a first-born; to treat as a first-born
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to delight, enchant, entrance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause sleeplessness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make or cause to appear distinguished; distinguished, stately, regal; delightful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiehie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beautify, make distinctive, beautiful, elegant; distinguished in manner or appearance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohihia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to get into difficulties, entangle, perplex, beset with trouble (Mat. 26.31) , complicate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohihina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to fall; to sway to and fro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohihiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause fear, frighten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause entanglement; to entwine, entangle
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take a fancy to, admire greatly, be enraptured with
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohikihiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hikihiki₁, to come repeatedly, as voices...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohikihiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hikihiki₂, to fetch repeatedly or a little at a time...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohikilele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to startle, shock
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohikiwawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to accelerate, hurry, hasten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to come, arrive, appear
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to vow, swear, take an oath, promise; to administer an oath; vow, oath, promise, pledge. see ʻōlelo hoʻohiki
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hila₁, same as hilahila₁, bashful, shy, ashamed...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilahila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make ashamed or embarrassed; to disgrace, humiliate; shameful, bashful, timid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to swing back and forth; to lean over, tilt. caus/sim of hilala, to reel, lean or tilt sideways.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilihili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻohili
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilihili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dye
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hilikau, mixed, snarled, entangled; to mix, snarl. See saying makau...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiliu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow a conch or wind instrument
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lead astray. caus/sim of hili₂, to turn aside, deviate, miss the way, wander, stray...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to whip, to whip gently. caus/sim of hili₃, to whip, smite, thrash, switch, bat; batter, as in baseball; stroke, as in fighting...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hilo₁, to twist, braid, spin; twisted, braided; threadlike; faint streak of light...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiluhilu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beautify, bedeck, decorate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to decorate, beautify
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohilu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to praise, exalt, dignify. see hilu₂, quiet, reserved, well-behaved, decorous...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to throw, cause to fall, knock down; to lean over.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohinuhinu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shine, polish; to show off
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohinuhinu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻohiluhilu, to beautify, bedeck, decorate... 
.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiohiolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang or drape festively. caus/sim of hiohiolo, redup. of hiolo, to tumble down, collapse...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overthrow, demolish, raze
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiolohia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hiolohia, pas/imp. of hiolo, to tumble down, collapse...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hiu₁, to throw or fling violently; to haul energetically with ropes; to get into action, as play or sport; to pursue with energy, as love-making...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hiu₂, to elevate, hoist, as by block and tackle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiwahiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to honor, 
   • adorn, decorate; 
   • to display, as the flag; 
   • to treat as a favorite;
   • festive...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be downright skin and bones
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hiō, to fall sideways, lean, slant, slope, incline, leaning, oblique, diagonal...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiōhiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻohiō
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hiʻi₁, to hold or carry in the arms, as a child; to bear; to nurse or tend a child...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoahoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hoahoa, a rounded tapa beater (also called hohoa, pepehi); rapid beating, striking, as of tapa or pandanus leaves; a stick beater for washing clothes. fig., bad-tempered...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoaloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make friends, be friendly, befriend
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to challenge, dare, provoke; daring, defiant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make friends.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have a canoe paddled. caus/sim of hoe₁, paddle, oar; to paddle, row...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohohoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hohoka, redup. of hoka₁, disappointed, thwarted, baffled; disappointment, frustration, hoka₂, to squeeze, strain...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hoholo, redup. of holo, to run, sail...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohohono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause or produce such an odor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohohonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deepen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohohō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a snort. caus/sim of hohō, to snore, snort, bray, heehaw, splash, gurgle, breathe hard, draw in mucus...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoihoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to entertain, amuse, charm, delight, encourage, please
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause disappointment, chagrin; to frustrate, thwart, put to shame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohokahoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hokahoka, redup. of hoka₁, disappointed, thwarted, baffled; disappointment, frustration, hoka₂, to squeeze, strain...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholo i mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to promote, cause progress; advancement, success
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholo kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drive a car or carriage
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholo lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as holo lio horseman (Puk. 14.9) ; to make a horse run
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholo manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of holo manaʻo, to decide, determine...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholoholo kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take someone for a drive or ride
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholoholoʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of holoholoʻōlelo, to gossip, slander, bear tales, tattle; tattler, talebearer, spreader of gossip...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholoholo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take someone out for a drive or excursion; to escort; to help walk, as a child or invalid
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholoholo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make large running stitches. caus/sim of holoholo₂, basting; to baste, sew...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have washed, cleaned; to pretend to wash
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholomoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sail (as a ship).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholopau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to finish, complete
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholoāiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of holoāiʻa, to swim like a fish; to get the bends; to drown, sink; the bends, caisson disease...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholoʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of holoʻōlelo, same as holoholoʻōlelo, to gossip, slander, bear tales, tattle; tattler, talebearer, spreader of gossip...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to sail, run;
   • to cause to run, sail, run free, as a horse; 
   • to ride, as a horse; 
   • to add water, as to poi; 
   • to flush, as a toilet; 
   • to drive, as a carriage...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to decide, determine, conclude; decision, judgment... 
   • enact, pass, 
   • resolve, settle, 
   • enforce, 
   • appraise, 
   • to manage, as a business; 
    cf. ʻōlelo hoʻoholo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grooved piece above the door frame, in which the door slides...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bend, move up and down, sway. caus/sim of holu₁, springy, pliable, resilient, as a mattress; to sway, as palm fronds; to ripple, as waves; to play back and forth; bumpy, as an airplane ride...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoholuholu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of holuholu, flexible...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hone₁, sweet and soft, as music; sweetly appealing, as perfume or a memory of love; to sound softly; to tease, play pranks; mischievous...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoni₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause or pretend to kiss
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohoni₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of honi₂, to smell, sniff, scent; a scent...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deepen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to establish land, act as land; to scoop out earth, as for a fireplace; firmly established. fig. rich (rare)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohopohopo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to evoke or produce doubt, fear, anxiety
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohua kama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sire a child
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make the huahua gesture
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuahualau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cross-examine, to ask indirectly, to obtain information by roundabout methods, to question indirectly, quiz. caus/sim of huahualau, interrogation to incriminate, ensnare, or obtain information by roundabout methods, to question or quiz indirectly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuakawowo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to induce pregnancy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a gleam of light, flash, glimmer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cast a shadow or reflection
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuakeʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hurt, angry, displeased, resentful... (see -huakeʻeo)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to polish. caus/sim of huali, bright, polished, clean, pure, white, glittering, gleaming; morally pure...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bear fruit, reproduce, produce, yield; 
   • to sire or give birth; 
   • to swell high, as a wave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have as a result, because of, ever since (followed by nō)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lengthen, continue, make a tail; to stream down, as water over a cliff
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuhuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pull, cause to pull. fig., headstrong
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuhū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provoke anger, pretend anger
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuihui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed; to mix individually identifiable things together (NKE12). caus/sim of huihui₁, mixed, mingled, united, joined; to pool together, as to buy cooperatively...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mix, confuse, complicate, perplex, scramble. caus/sim of huikau, mixed, confused, haphazard, blurred; mix-up, confusion, jumble; to mix...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carve or sharpen into a point
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form a society
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to join, as two words; to add a prefix or suffix; to add on, annex, append, unite; to introduce one person to another; meeting of persons; binder
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohukihuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hukihuki₂, to disagree, quarrel; disagreement; not cooperative, headstrong, obstinate...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pull gently. caus/sim of huki₁, to pull or tug, as on a rope; to draw, stretch, reach; to support, as a political party...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>willful, headstrong
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to project, protrude
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause someone to dance; to pretend to hula
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohulali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hulali₁, shining, glittering, glossy, slippery; to shine, glitter, sparkle, reflect light...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohulei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trot, cause to trot, move back and forth. caus/sim of hulei, to lift, raise, draw up, as a skirt; to pull, pry; to pitch and toss, as a ship on the waves; to move along, as a ship; to flap wings; to trot, as a horse...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuli manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to induce change of opinion, influence, convert
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohulihuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to convert; proselyte. caus/sim of hulihuli, redup. of huli₁ to turn, reverse; to curl over, as a breaker; to change, as an opinion or manner of living...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohulili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hulili, dazzling light, vibration, undulation; to blaze, sparkle, dazzle, glare, vibrate, swell...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn, change, affect, overturn, convert, reform
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of huli₂, to look for, search, explore, seek, study; search, investigation; scholarship...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to esteem, prize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hulā, to prod, pry, uproot, pierce and penetrate, expel, reject...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohulō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hulō, hurrah, cheers...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohume</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put a loincloth on another
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make someone sew
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohune₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause poverty, impoverish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohune₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to persist, nag, tease; to do with avidity and persistence
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohunāhunā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hunāhunā, to hide frequently or be hidden by many persons; secretly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to suspect, surmise distrust; suspicion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provoke anger or jealousy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to insist, persist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuʻahuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of huʻahuʻa₁, foam, froth, lather, bubbling, frothing...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohuʻihuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make cold, chill, as by refrigeration
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beat, pound, as tapa; to harden.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāhāpaʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather salt
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to contract, shrink, restrict, curtail, narrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hāinu, to give drink.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohākoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hākoʻi, same as hakukoʻi agitated; paraphimosis...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohākuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hākuʻi, to beat, pound, pummel; to echo, reverberate; to flutter, palpitate, thump; to puff, as smoke...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohākuʻikuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hākuʻikuʻi, redup. of hākuʻi to beat, pound, pummel...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohākā moa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cockfighting. caus/sim of hākā moa, cockfight...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohākālia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to delay, slow down; slow, dilatory; hesitation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohālana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hālana₁, to overflow, flood...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohālau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make numerous
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohālike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to compare, contrast, 
   • make alike, 
   • resemble, 
   • copy; 
   • artificial.
   • example (Wight)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohālikelike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>comparison, resemblance, similarity, impersonation; to equalize, match, impersonate...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāliu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hāliu, to turn, look, hearken, incline, have regard...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāliʻaliʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>remind, reminiscent. caus/sim of hāliʻaliʻa, redup. of hāliʻa. sudden remembrance, memory...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hālua₂,
   • to ambush, lie in wait, waylay, 
   • spy,
   • provoke trouble...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohālāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to arrange a meeting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāmama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open, expose; to pretend to open, yawn
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāmau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to silence, hush
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohānau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as midwife, deliver a baby; to reproduce
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohānau hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a rebirth, baptize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause an avalanche, slide; to flatten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāpai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of hāpai₁, to carry, bear, lift, elevate, raise, hoist, hold up; to support, as another's testimony...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāpai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause conception; to perform ceremonies or take treatment to induce conception
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to besmear, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāuliuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to darken
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāʻawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have something carried on the back; to load on the back
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāʻule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drop, cause to fall
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohāʻupu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to recollect, recall
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hōhē, cowardly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to purge (of bowels). caus/sim of hī₂, dysentery, diarrhea; to flow, hiss; to purge...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohīpuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tie, bind
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohōkai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause confusion, mix up, bother; to blot out the memory
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohūleilei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to toss, as a child on one's foot. caus/sim of hūleilei, redup. of hulei, to lift, raise, draw up, as a skirt; to pull, pry; to pitch and toss, as a ship on the waves; to move along, as a ship; to flap wings; to trot, as a horse...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohūnā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hide deliberately.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause someone to deviate from the path; 
   • to shoo, drive away, 
   • rout
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻohū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to leaven, cause to rise,
   • inflate, 
   • swell, 
   • overflow; 
   • yeast, 
   • baking powder
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoihoiho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in quilting, to make running stitches towards the sewer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoihona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>descent, slope; to descend, go south
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoiho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of iho₁, 
   • to go down, descend; descent...
   • downhill, 
   • towards the sea;
   • to subside; 
   • go south or before the wind;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoiho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>besides that, also, furthermore,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a great effort, work hard, encourage, animate, strengthen, fortify, try, strive, strain; calisthenics
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lessen, diminish, make small
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoilimoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a service for luakini dedications.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoilina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heir, inheritance, legacy, estate, heritage, bequest; successor (so used in the official English version of the Constitution of 1852, Article 25)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to land upon, 
   • load, as freight on a ship; 
   • to transfer, consign, transmit; see ili₂, inheritance.
   • to set on shore... see ili₁, stranded
   • to rush on, as in battle, to start a battle, attack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoiloilo, hoīloilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to predict disaster or misfortune
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a strong, bitter purgative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoilo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause germination or sprouting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoinaina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up anger, rouse hate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoinaina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sooth as by soft music
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoioio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut grooves; to sew a quilt so that stitches settle in grooves
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make love, court, woo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoiwi akua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to impart mana to a human bone
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to despise, detest, treat with contempt of scorn; 
   • destroy, devastate (Oihk. 26.31); 
   • to refrain from doing, as due to horror.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahakaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kahakaha₁, to mark frequently, to draw lines, scratch; to cut lengthwise or into strips; to scarify, engrave; striped, lined...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahakaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to parade back and forth, make a display or exhibition; parade, celebration, exhibition, display; 
   • to show off, act the dandy; vanity, pomp;
   • to drill, as a fire drill; 
   • superb, showy.   
caus/sim of kahakaha₂, redup. of kaha₃ swoop...; pass by...; surf...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kaha₁, 
   • to scratch, mark, check, draw, sketch, 
   • cut, cut open or slice lengthwise, as fish or animals; 
   • to operate, as on the sick; 
   • to give a grade or mark to; 
   • to engrave; 
   • a line in mathematics; 
   • punctuation or other mark, as an accent mark...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kaha₃, 
   • to swoop, as a kite; 
   • to be poised, 
   • soar, as a bird (less used than kīkaha); 
   • to go by, pass by, 
   • to turn and go on; 
   • to surf, body surf...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to extort. caus/sim of kaha₄, to desolate, plunder, cheat...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to water or irrigate; to cause to flow, discharge, drain
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahe koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shed blood; bloodshed
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahekahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokahe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahekahe wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irrigation, to irrigate,  to water. also same as naʻinaʻi mimi  contest in urinating by small boys. lit., urine striving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to think, act, speak in the old way; to speak of old times; to cling to old ways; old-fashioned; maturity
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kahi₁, to cut longitudinally, shave, plane, comb, press, rub or stroke, as in a massage, with gentle pressure of the open palm of the hand; to scrape; to run the fingers along the side of a poi bowl so as to...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lay a foundation, establish, found; 
   • to camp or be stationed, as soldiers; 
   • to settle down and develop a place, as homesteaders
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kahuli, to overturn, overthrow, capsize, upset...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be a kahuna or pretend to be one; to ordain or train as a kahuna
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as a kahu; to appoint a kahu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokahu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a fire for cooking in the oven; to act as kahu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaikaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim a kaikaina relationship; to act as a kaikaina, to address and treat as kaikaina, as from affection
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaikuahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim a kuahine relationship; to address and treat as a kaikuahine, as from affection
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaikuaʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim a kaikuaʻana relationship, to act as a kaikuaʻana, to address and treat as kaikuaʻana; to address a kaikaina as kaikuaʻana as a means of showing great respect...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaikunāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim a kaikunāne relationship, to act as a kaikunāne; to address and treat as kaikunāne, as from affection
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokainuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take possession (referring to an action of a god)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to parade, as Lahaina-Luna students
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make soft or watery; soft, flexible, saggy, soft, limp; to dilute
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kakane, blight on plants; blighted...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make noises
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kakano, to persist, keep on...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to turn, roll, etc.; to turn somersaults or cartwheels
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakaʻawale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokaʻawale
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokakaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lead, take along
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokake₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak kake; to speak unclearly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokake₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to disturb. caus/sim of kake₂, to slip back and forth; to mix, shuffle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokalakalai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kalakalai, to carve, cut, hew, hoe, etc., a little at a time; to whittle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokalakupua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>magic; to do wondrous acts; a magician, enchanter, witchcraft; extraordinary fisherman, elusive thief
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokalalī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hurry. caus/sim of kalalī, to go quickly, briskly, without noticing anyone; to walk or talk in a brisk, haughty way; proud; such activity...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kala₁, 
   • to loosen, untie, free, release, 
   • remove, unburden, take off, undo; 
   • absolve, let go, acquit, 
   • to forgive, pardon, excuse; 
   • to proclaim, announce; 
   • to substitute for; 
   • counter-sorcery...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sharpen, grind (so called because things were formerly sharpened by rubbing against a rough surface); sharpener; to speak roughly or harshly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make liquid (less used than hoʻokakale)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokalekale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make watery or thin; to lie, deceive; soft, spongy, sagging
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to wait, delay; lingering, slow, as a disease
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to adopt a child or adult one loves, but for whom one might not have the exclusive care (An older adult of either sex might be adopted thus. A child so adopted, termed keiki hoʻokama, is somewhat comparable to a godchild. An adult so adopted might be called kaikuaʻana hoʻokama, kaikaina hoʻokama, kaikuahine hoʻokama, kaikunāne hoʻokama.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamahaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be or do something wonderful; to take a new and more splendid form.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamakama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prostitute; prostitute, prostitution, concubine. lit., to cause children.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a favorite of a person, to treat with indulgence, to pamper, spoil, or lavish with favors; to put on finicky airs and mannerisms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>childish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamaniha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sullen, cross, resentful, hostile, uncivil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act the hypocrite (Mat. 15.7); to deal falsely (Oihk. 19.11), to disguise oneself (1-Nal. 14.2), to pretend, be insecure; hypocrite; sham.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamaʻilio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk and lead up to the subject one wishes to discuss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokamaʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to become acquainted with
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kanaaho, relieved after a struggle; feeling of ease or relief after surviving sickness or danger; joy over escape; rest after violent exertion or danger; breathless arrival; refuge; one convalescing or resting...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanahaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, depressed, stunted, humble, cautious, moderate; to lessen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanahaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kanahaʻu, rare var. of kanahaʻi diminish, lessen...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise up, as a whale's back in the water; bent, humpbacked, disobedient; bend, crook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanahē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drive or urge forward, accelerate, hurry, quicken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conceited, vain, overbearing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaka makua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as an adult, to act mature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manly, human, courageous; to become a servant or helper; to assume human shape, as a child in the womb.  see hoʻokanaka makua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaleʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kanaleʻo, to deceive, mislead, feign, act the hypocrite; deceitful...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokananeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to disregard, as instruction, warning, danger, careless of danger, indifference to discomfort or health.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokananuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause sulkiness; dull of hearing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻokanahē to drive or urge forward, accelerate, hurry, quicken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conceited, feeling that one is superior to everybody else.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanaʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in doubt; to hesitate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause loss of appetite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanikani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokani; also a diminutive:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokano₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to harden; 
   • to form a tuber, as of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to plant or bury.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaomi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to add or feign pressing, pressure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokapalulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crackle, roar, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokapeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to loosen, set askew; 
   • to tilt, as a canoe; 
   • to sit or loosen the clothing so as to cause indecent exposure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make taboo, prohibit, sanctify consecrate, forbid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokapukapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to impose a taboo, especially on something not previously taboo; to pretend a taboo that was not existent; to extol, praise, glorify.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put on, place on, lay on, as responsibility; to happen, come to pass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokauaheahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hover; to fly softly, gently, continuously, at the same speed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokauhihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to entangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokauhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause pregnancy; 
   • gestation; 
   • pregnancy sickness; 
   • pregnancy craving
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaukau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place, put, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaulana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make famous; 
   • to spread a report concerning a person or thing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to equalize, balance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokauluwela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kauluwela₁, glowing, bright-colored, colorful...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaumaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to burden, load down, laden.  fig., to oppress, cause sadness or grief; sorrowful, woeful, sorry, depressed, oppressive, burdensome.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kaunu₁, 
   • to make love; 
   • to love; 
   • thrill of love, passion; 
   • to be fascinated, absorbed...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaupale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a separation, barrier; to disown, disinherit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaupalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kaupalena, to limit, mark a border or boundary, restrict, moderate, set a deadline; limitation, deadline, ration...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokauā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to burden with work, 
   • make a servant of, 
   • enslave; 
   • to act as servant or outcast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokauō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be dragged; to prolong vowels in chanting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokawowo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kawowo, seedling; thrifty young plant; sucker, shoot from a parent stalk; to multiply and thrive, as a plant or people. fig., progeny. See hoʻohua kawowo...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻahea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soothe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻakaʻawili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokaʻawili to cause pain; to torture; to cause to twist or writhe; to fondle or pet in ardent love-making.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻakaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kaʻakaʻa₁, to open, as the eyes; open, watching...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻakaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to roll repeatedly. also hoʻokakaʻa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. of hoʻokaʻa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to divide equally among, share
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell tales; story telling
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻawale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to separate, distinguish (1 Nal. 3.9) ; to cause a division; to keep a distance or distinction; to establish as a separate entity; to set aside, appropriate, sort, segregate, reserve, discriminate, differentiate...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻawili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause pain (Ier. 4.19); to torture;    • to cause to twist or writhe;    • to fondle or pet in ardent love-making.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻaʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to separate, set apart, refrain, abstain from
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a rolling, turning
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pay a debt, disburse, avenge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to daub, smudge, soil, smear.  cf. haukaʻe. also hōkaʻe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻekaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokaʻe  to smudge, smear, blot. also hōkaʻekaʻe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻukaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause delay, linger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokaʻulua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause delay, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause height, pride, boasting, etc. same as keha, height, pride, dignity; lofty, high, prominent; majestic, dignified; to brag, boast, praise; to rise to the top. fig., head...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokehakeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act proudly; to cause pride.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeikei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of keikei, redup. of kei, glory, take pride in...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokekeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crook, bend, twist out of shape, pervert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of keku, to repulse, shove away, nudge...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokekē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scold, expose the teeth, etc. also. haʻakekē.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokekē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kekē₃, indecent exposure by a woman or girl; admonition to a female to sit properly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to outdo, surpass, excel, exceed; to show off, try to excel, show preference; higher, superior, vain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokelakela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to brag, show off, flaunt, display; 
   • disrespectful, overbearing, conceited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokelekele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make muddy; to sprinkle; soak material, as pandanus leaves, in water to make pliable for plaiting; to feed, fatten, especially with soft food or liquids.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokelekele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokele; to steer, navigate or sail frequently; to manage; to cast, as for fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make muddy; 
   • to sprinkle; 
   • to soak material, as pandanus leaves, in water to make pliable for plaiting; 
   • to feed, fatten, especially with soft food or liquids...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• steersman, helmsman, navigator; 
   • to sail or navigate, as the master of a ship; 
   • to steer; 
   • to drive, as a car, 
   • fig., to conduct any business...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of stone found at craters, as Kīlauea, and used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to satisfy thirst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokenākenā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to compel, order.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeonimana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gentlemanly conduct or etiquette; to act as a gentleman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut obliquely, snap, tear, rend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokepania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act like or mimic Spaniards or Spanish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokepanī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act like or mimic Japanese.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cross, block, obstruct, hinder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a turn, as in cutting paper or cloth; to turn, as in walking; to bend, form an angle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeʻekeʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokeʻe; zigzag, angular; zigzag lines, as in a mat motif.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeʻekeʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokeʻe; cranky, surly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeʻemoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behave thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whiten, bleach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokeʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whiten, to bleach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stream (flow). caus/sim of kiawe₂, a streak; to stream gracefully, as rain in the wind; to sway, as branches...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to post a watch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a corner by overlapping, as in plaiting; to fold partially over; to turn aside, make a corner
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokihikihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to branch out, make corners, make irregular
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokikilua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in the card game high-low-jack-and-the-game, to hide one's strength and then play a winning card
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokikina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokina.  goad, urge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hatch
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to flow, pour, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rain gently
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokilihune</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kilihune₁, fine, light rain, wind-blown spray, drizzle; to shower lightly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiloi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feign throwing; to cause to throw; to attract someone's attention by throwing something at him, as a stone, leaf, flower
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokilo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kilo₁, stargazer, reader of omens, seer, astrologer, necromancer; kind of looking glass (rare); to watch closely, spy, examine, look around, observe, forecast...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, wasted
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokinakina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokina₁ to persist, do continually; incessant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to persist, do continually; incessant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to urge, compel, 
   • add one burden or command to another
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to take shape, 
   • embody; 
   • to develop, as a puny infant; 
   • to take form, as a spirit
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokino wailua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kino wailua, spirit of the dead; dead person, bodily remains, corpse...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread out, project
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to foment or act in revolt; rebellious
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to curve, bend; to stagger, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiwikiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kiwikiwi, redup. of kiwi, horn of an animal; curved object; curved, bent; to pull obliquely; to reel and stagger...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kiʻe, same as kiʻekiʻe, height, tallness...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to elevate;  elevation, 
   • lift up; 
   • promote; promotion,
   • proud, vain; conceit
   • lording it over others, overbearing, disrespectful or disobedient to seniors
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiʻikiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to fetch, fetch, take hold of, seize, get
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to send, have sent for; to take away
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hōkiʻi, thin, wasted
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gather or settle, as water in a lake or pond; 
   • to cease flowing, of menstruation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brave; to cause bravery
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as a soldier; to cause to be a soldier
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to endeavor to walk in spite of weakness; mentally at rest after mental agitation, calmed. caus/sim of koene, to edge away, back away, creep, move cautiously and carefully, as a frightened or feeble person...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to save, reserve for later use, cause a remainder
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip bare or naked
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fold pandanus matting to form a corner; to form a crease, groove, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to choose, elect, appoint
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokohukohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokohu; to pretend, impersonate, disguise, pose; affectation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokohu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to assume a likeness to;  pretense
   • to presume to; presumption, 
   • to make advances, perhaps hypocritically; 
   • to take a fancy to; to have a crush on;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokohu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appoint, commission, authorize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of koi₁, to urge, implore, persuade, compel, require, insist on, ask insistently, demand, claim, pull; requirement...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause bloodshed; to blush (rare). fig., angry. cf. piʻi ka ʻula under piʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokokoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kokoe, redup. of koe₂  remain, exclude...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokokoke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw near, approach...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokokolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kokolo, redup. of kolo, to creep...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokokonoiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rouse, encourage, incite
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokokōhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slow and stunted of growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokokōhi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black and threatening, as clouds before a storm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokokōhi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forceful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to arouse sexual excitement, titillate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolakola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kolakola, redup. of kola₁  hard, sexually excited...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolekole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cook rare; to skin, denude, bruise. caus/sim of kolekole₁, redup. of kole₁, rawness...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flutter, wave
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to creep, crawl; 
   • to follow a trail, track, clue; 
   • to trace to a source.     
cf. hoʻokolokolo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do mischief, play pranks, etc.; to cause to be mischievous; to disturb, annoy; to do amusing things to create laughter; funny, humorous, comical, mischievous
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolokolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to try in court, judge, investigate; judiciary; trial. cf. hale hoʻokolokolo court house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokololio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kololio₁, same as kokololio, gust...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokololohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to delay maliciously, to loiter sullenly, to dillydally in order to annoy; to not cooperate, sulk
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend not to hear, to feign deafness; indifferent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokolonuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻokananuha to cause sulkiness; dull of hearing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokomokomo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a spirit, usually evil, to possess; possession
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokomokomo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dress, as children
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokomokomo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to file, put in
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokomo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to insert, put or let in, 
   • enter, 
   • pack, 
   • penetrate, 
   • import, 
   • sink into, 
   • deposit, 
   • install, 
   • admit.     
see niho hoʻokomo, false tooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokomo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dress another person
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of koni, to throb, pulsate, tingle, beat; to flutter, as the heart; to tug, as small fish on baited hook...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to invite
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokonokono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to induce, entice, urge persistently, especially to urge someone to will him his property; 
   • to set dogs to fight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokonā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of konā, hard, unyielding, unfriendly, contemptuous, brusque, haughty...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻakoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of koʻakoʻa₄, to stay or live in one place...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to settle, as dregs.  fig., to put one's mind on a thing, concentrate upon
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻekoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make cold; to chill
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of koʻele, sound of tapping, as wood against wood; ticking, as of clock; thumping, trudging; rattling, as a window; crack of thunder; to tap, tick, thump, trudge, crackle, rattle; noisy, stormy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻokoʻikoʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻikoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deepen the voice; to stress or emphasize in speech; to treat with severity, harshness, rigor; to burden, oppress
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻikoʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stress; accent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prop with a pole, as a heavily laden banana plant, or a house to keep it from falling down; to pole, as a canoe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻokoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to push, brace, resist, lean back and brace oneself
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokoʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of koʻū, damp, moist. fig., thriving, prosperous...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to persevere in work even when interest and pleasure have gone from it; burdensome
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokua kapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make such an anvil
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokua kapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form a boundary. lit., make stand border
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuakahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to remove obstruction, interference; to clear the way, free
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuakaʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻohuakeʻeo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bleach or whiten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuakeʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻohuakeʻeo hurt, angry, displeased, resentful...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to heap up, as in banks; to make spaces between lines of stitching in quilting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokualana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fail in strength. caus/sim of kualana₁, lazy, indolent, bored, fatigued; roving about without a chief to support one, as a "floater" (lana); to wander...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whiten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuanoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to meditate, think deeply
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kuanui; to do a thing grudgingly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enslave, oppress, downtrodden, slaving
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuapuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sit humped. caus/sim of kuapuʻu₁, hunchback; hunchbacked; hump, as of a camel...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuapōlaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to assemble tribute for a high chief
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuaʻiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kuaʻiʻi, to flatter, cajole with flattery...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuaʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act like one from the country; countrified, rustic
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuekuene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kuekuene, redup. of kuene, waiter; supervise...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of all meanings of kuene: 
   • waiter, to wait on table; 
   • steward, 
   • treasurer; 
   • to supervise, put in order, arrange; 
   • to lay out, as measurements for a building.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kuewa,
   •  vagabond, 
   • exile, 
   • wanderer; wandering, 
   • friendless, 
   • homeless, 
   • unstable...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuhikuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rare caus/sim of kuhikuhi₁, to show, demonstrate, designate, prescribe, teach, give orders; to direct heiau ceremonies; one always giving orders; reference, direction, prescription, exponent; bossy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to teach the art of gesturing in the hula; to point, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kuhi₂, to suppose, think, infer, presume, assume, expect, surmise, imagine...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoo, drive off, banish, expel, oust, evict, eject
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokukule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kukule, inactive, listless, unresponsive, dejected...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokukuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kukuli, knee; to kneel; to crouch or lie as an animal, with feet under the body...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokukuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to imitate the walk of a clubfooted person
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokula manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make into a bird place
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokulana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause insecurity. caus/sim of kulana, to tilt, rock, reel, sway, toss and pitch; wobbly, shaky, unsteady. fig., insecure, hesitant...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokulaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kulaʻi, to push over, knock down, overthrow, shove, push to one side; to brush off...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuleana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to entitle, give  or delegate right to possess; to give a responsibility; copyright (OO)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• deaf; to feign deafness. 
   • fig., to disobey; disobedient
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuloukulou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kuloukulou, redup. of kūlou, to bow the head, bend; to beckon with the head...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokulukulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to drip, distill. caus/sim of kulukulu₁, to drip, leak, drop: leaky...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokumakaia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kumakaia, traitor, turncoat; traitorous; to betray; to abuse one who has been kind to one...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a beginning, originate, create, commence, establish, inaugurate, initiate, institute, found, start...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause coughing; to pretend to cough
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kuolo₂, to tremble, as the voice; to shake, as with palsy; to vibrate, resonate, as a chanting voice...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kuoni, to walk gently, slowly, softly; to lag behind...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to naturalize, make a citizen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokupaianaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amaze. caus/sim of kupaianaha, surprising, strange, wonderful, amazing, extraordinary, unaccountable, marvelous; astonishing situation...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokupe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kupe₁, to stumble, twist the ankle. fig., to misstep, err in conduct...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokupuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take a person as a grandparent or grandaunt or granduncle because of affection; an adopted grandparent; to act as a grandparent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokupu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause growth, sprouting; to sprout
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokupu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tribute, tax, ceremonial gift-giving to a chief as a sign of honor and respect; to pay such tribute; church offering
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuānea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make lonely, barren.  fig., to behave ignorantly; to cause boredom, dreariness; boring
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻakuʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trade, buy and sell
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻekuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to elbow, push with the elbows
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻekuʻemaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frown
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻemaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frown, scowl
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>checks and balances, as in government
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻikahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to unite, reconcile, agree, make a peace treaty or armistice; armistice
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻikuʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokuʻi₃ to hit, pound, collide, crash, bump. fig., to hurt the felings...; to jostle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kuʻina₂
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to join, connect, annex, weld, unite; 
   • to connect, as letters in forming a word; 
   • to spell; 
   • to dovetail, fit, splice; 
   • to add up, as numbers
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>zenith
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hit, pound, collide, crash, bump. fig., to hurt the felings
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻu kāua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>let's stop
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻu maikaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honorable discharge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻu ʻia mai ka hopu ʻia ʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exemption from arrest
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻukuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• lenient, permissive; 
   • to pay out, as a fishline.
   caus/sim of kuʻukuʻu₁, to let down gradually, slack off a little at a time...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokuʻukuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kuʻukuʻu₂
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dash down, shatter, break, strike
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to entrap, ensnare, entangle, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dress someone in finery to adorn, decorate, deck, trim, array; to wear fine clothes
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhikohiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāhikohiko₂, redup. of kāhiko, finery...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to brush or fan gently. caus/sim of kāhili₁, feather standard, symbolic of royalty; segment of a rainbow standing like a shaft (also a sign of royalty); to brush, sweep, switch...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāhinu, to rub with oil, grease, petroleum jelly; to anoint...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāhiō, to lean to one side (kā-₂ + hinu). cf. the more common hiō...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to hurry; to speed, hurry
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāholoholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻokāholo, to exercise, as a horse; to practice racing; skittering in fishing
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāhuli₁, to change, alter...; pervert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāhāhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surprising, astonishing; to cause astonishment
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokākoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kākoʻo, to uphold, support, favor, assist, prop up; to bind, as with a sash or belt; support, aid, recommendation, girdle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokākāuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stretch forth, 
   • to make rigid;
   • to oppress; 
   • to flex muscles, as in desire to show off one's strength
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokālai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• caus/sim of kālai, to carve, cut, hew, engrave, hoe; to divide, as land; to shape a canoe
   • fig. an enterprise or intellectual policy; to plan, formulate, budget...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokālaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to clear; to become clear
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokālele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to support; stress. see hilinaʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokālilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause death; to have the appearance of death
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokālilolilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kālilolilo, redup. of kālilo dying, at death's door; to lie hovering between life and death...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāluhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to droop, flirt, etc.; to cause drooping
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāluli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to bend and sway
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāmaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male homosexuality; to practice such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāmakamaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ask forgiveness, to seek restoration of friendship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāmau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāmau₁, to keep on, continue, persevere, last, add a little more...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāmau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat, as ʻinamona relish. caus/sim of kāmau₂, to drink, especially intoxicants, to eat (rare) to your health (something like prosit)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāmaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put on shoes, furnish shoes
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāmaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāmaʻe, to feign friendliness and good will when there may be hatred; insincere, hypocritical...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāmoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāmoku, to break, cut, as land...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokānalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause doubt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to behave as a male; 
   • masculine; 
   • to adopt a man as a platonic friend, said of a woman (the relationship cements friendship between the relatives of both participants); 
   • to offer to become husband or sweetheart.   
cf. ho‘owahine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokānāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to impose a law, especially to vow not to associate with certain persons or places until certain conditions are fulfilled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāpae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to turn off, push aside, parry, thrust away, refute an argument.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāpekepeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāpekepeke, to walk unsteadily, totter; insecure, unsteady. fig., doubtful, uncertain, vague, inconstant, fickle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāpili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāpili, to build, put together, put on (as glasses), fit together, set (as precious stones), mend, fix, repair, shingle, join, plaster, unite, attach blame, shoe (as a horse)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāpuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kāpuhi; 
   • to feed an eel; 
   • to nurse or care for a child or person. 
   • fig., clever, smart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāpule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ripen, fatten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāpōʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rotate, revolve, as in a hula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāwala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make sparse; to eat sparingly; to talk unintelligibly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāwele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wipe, pretend to wipe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kāwili, to mix ingredients, blend; to ensnare birds, as with lime; entwined, interwoven, interlaced...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāwōwō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to roar, as a wind or waterfall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāʻalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass to and fro, to cause to pass
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• witty, clever, funny, entertaining, humorous; 
   • to pass the time pleasantly; entertaining time
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāʻeuʻeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to encourage and bestir to action. also hōkāʻeuʻeu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tug and pull as though to snatch, but not with great force, as in playing with a kitten; to cause a snatching, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to progress, go ahead, improve, better; progressive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokāʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to separate from others, 
   • keep away, 
   • abstain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokēkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crowd... redup. of hoʻokē₁, to crowd, elbow, push aside, jostle, struggle, oppress, shun, scorn, protest...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokēāmaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>selfish, ungracious, as one eating in the presence of others; partial; partiality.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokēʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shun, slight, avoid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to crowd, elbow, push aside, jostle, 
   • shun, scorn, 
   • oppress, 
   • struggle, 
   • protest.
   • fig., to beset with difficulties.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to shoot; to sick on, as a dog; to make a cat spit; to snort; emitted. caus/sim of kī₃, to shoot or aim, as with a gun; to squirt water, as with a syringe; to blow from the mouth...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīhā₁, belch, burp; to belch or burp...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīkeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go zigzag
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīkeʻekeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīkeʻekeʻe, zigzag...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīkiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīkiʻi₁, to lean back; to tilt, heel, as a ship; to stretch out, extend...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ready with a rude retort, answer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīkī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīkī, redup. of kī, to shoot, as a gun; to incite or sick, as a dog; to spout...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīlepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīlepa₁, to float in the wind, to flutter, flap, flip...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīmō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīmō, to pound, bruise, mash, as with stick or stone; to smash, break into bits; to dub out the inside of a canoe log with an adze, tamping and smoothing the surface; to crack, as nuts...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīnohi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīnohi, decorated, spotted, ornamented; decoration, ornamentation...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīnohi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to adorn, add color
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīnā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause defect, disaster, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīpehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīpehi, to pelt, throw at. fig., to assail with rough language, speak harshly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīpulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enrich or fertilize, as soil
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokīpupū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kīpupū, to hinder, draw back; to jerk and start, as an automobile...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• executive; 
   • to fulfill; to carry out, as a contract; 
   • to enforce, execute, confirm, construe, interpret, decree; 
   • to award, as land; 
   • to probate, perform, satisfy; 
   • to transact, accomplish; 
   • to cause a conception; 
   • confirmation, award...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokō kauoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>executor of an estate (o-class)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokōheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kōheo₁, to show off, parade, strut...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokōhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Cc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokōkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kōkē, to strike, hit, punish...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokōkōliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise, as a thick black cloud
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokōwā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to separate by a space
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokōʻehaʻeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause heat. fig., to distress
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūamuamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūamuamu, to revile, blaspheme, curse, swear, damn, insult; to chant a curse or reviling song...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūkū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• contest, game, match; to hold a contest, compete, 
   • compare; 
   • to place evenly, as canoes about to race (hoʻokūkū like i nā waʻa)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūkū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fit, as a garment; a fitting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūkū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to shake; to shake, bounce
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūkū₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uncomfortably full, as after overeating
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūlanalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūlanalana, unsteady, tottering, unsettled, wavering, wobbly, undecided, uncertain, fluctuating...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūlia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūlia₂, to try, strive...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūlike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to conform, make alike
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūlipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūlipo, dark, dank, deep, as a cave. fig. extremely, intense, much...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūlou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bow down, cause to bow, humiliate; to subdue, as an enemy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūmene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flatten. caus/sim of kūmene, blunt, flat, of the nose...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūmole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smooth, make even, as stones in a wall
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūnaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūnaʻi, same as kūnaʻina, to conquer, push over; conquest...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūnānā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūnānā₁, puzzled, stumped, at wit's end, hesitating, undecided, bewildered; uncertain. lit., stand look...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūoʻe, to saunter, trudge...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūpaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to emit fragrance; fragrant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūpaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to remain loyal, firm, etc.; loyal, steady.
   • to persist, 
   • perform, 
   • make fast, 
   • strengthen, fortify, 
   • establish;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūpene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūpene, permanent, stationary; to reside long in one place...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūpikiʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūpikiʻō, agitated, raging, turbulent, as wind or storm. fig., mentally disturbed...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behave uprightly; to conform to; to go straight toward, face toward, proceed correctly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūpouli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anguish. caus/sim of kūpouli, befuddled, stupefied, mentally clouded, dazed, carried away with emotion, stricken...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thicken. caus/sim of kūpū, thick, as gravy, or moisture-laden lomi fish; to jell...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūwaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stay or keep on the outside
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūwō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to howl. caus/sim of kūwō, see uwō, var. spelling of uō, bellow, roar...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūāhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūāhua, heap, pile; heaped or piled up; rising up, as a whale's back above water. lit., back heap (āhua)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūākino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to change form; transubstantiation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūāʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to influence one into bad behavior; evil
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to howl. caus/sim of kūō, to cry loudly, as with joy or pain; to howl, as a dog; to roar, as a lion...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show beforehand; to recognize at sight
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>convinced; to prove, verify; to insist on the truth of a matter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to ʻoi₂ best, superior, superb, main, prominent, exceeding...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to establish independence, make independent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to indent, form a bay, cranny, or corner
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻonoʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prosper
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of kūʻoʻi, same as kūpāʻoʻi, to limp...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause opposition, to stir up resistance; to oppose, clash
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokūʻēʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up opposition or disagreement
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻokū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to produce a resemblance, likeness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to be wise; to act smart; pretentious
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to spread abroad, publish, advertise, broadcast, 
   • disseminate, distribute, circulate, 
   • make known, promulgate, increase, propagate; 
   • advertisement, propagation, publicity
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause thinness, frailty; thin, frail (as cloth, paper)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaholaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as laholaho; miserly; to hoard
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tame, domesticate; to treat with kindness, as a child or animal, so as to familiarize with one
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolakalaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolaka to tame
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bring luck; lucky...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolako</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to supply, 
   • equip, 
   • provide, 
   • furnish, 
   • enrich
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolako kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to supply arms, arm, fortify
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolakolako</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolako  to supply, equip, provide, furnish, enrich.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn aside
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolalahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to swell
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolalau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to deceive, as in actions to conceal what one is about; 
   • to divert, as a child from the matter he is crying about; 
   • roundabout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolalau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to wander, lead astray; 
   • to procrastinate, dillydally, kill time; 
   • to digress or wander in speech, perhaps to avoid a subject...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolalawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to produce thrills, itching
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolalaʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to insist on accompanying
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hasten,  hurry;
   • to incite, provoke, 
   • to propose, to urge, suggest strongly, encourage
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolalelale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolale; to inspire, incite, rouse
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause greasiness, glitter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolanakila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to triumph; overbearing or impudent, as of a spoiled child unafraid of punishment, or of a most privileged, unassailable person
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolanalana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolana
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolanalana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make lashings, to lash
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolanamanaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hopeful, encouraging.  (Kel. 15) see hoʻolana under lana₁
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as lana₃, to be aware of noises as one wakes...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disobedient, willful
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to float, launch; 
   • to right a canoe. 
   • fig., to launch a project;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• cheerful, unworrying, hopeful; to cheer up, encourage, be of good cheer; 
   • to lighten grief, as by taking a mourner on a trip and away from the grave of the one he mourns. 
   (Mat. 14.27)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolanilani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolani; to treat as a chief; to claim relationship to a chief, especially unwarranted
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolanilani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exalt, praise redup. of hoʻolani to exalt, praise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat as a chief; to render homage to a chief; to act as a chief; to enjoy the position and prestige of a high chief
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻolanilani₂ to exalt, praise...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fish for eels with eel-catching stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolapalapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to blaze, boil, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to rise up; 
   • to boil; to cook by boiling
   • to swell, as a blister; 
   • to spread or blaze, as fire or volcanic eruption; 
   • to excite or flare, as with passion; 
   • to animate;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolapa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form a ridge; ridge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to be a ghost, as children on Halloweʻen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolapulapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lapulapu, to pick up, as sticks for fuel; to collect, gather; to handle, tie...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolau pala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show signs of fading, of a leaf; to show signs of failing health; also same as lau pala
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolauaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cherish, as a beloved memory
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaukanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have many people about one; to dispel loneliness with people
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaukoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as above
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaukōnā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat cruelly, mercilessly; to oppress; to cause hatred
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaulaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread, circulate, publicize, make known
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolauleʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>celebration, festival, gathering for a celebration, large party; satisfaction; to hold a celebration, to celebrate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolauleʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reconcile, restore peace or friendship, appease ((Kin. 32:20) ); to preserve friendship and good will; to be at peace with; to seek to please.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaulima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to get to cooperate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaumania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smooth; to spread out smoothly and evenly; to free of bumps or lumps
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to introduce one person to another; to be friendly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaunea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of launea, bare, as of leaves...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaupaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make an abundance, supply, cause an increase, reproduce
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolauwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause fickleness, change, twist
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to use a lau
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bundle of grass or ferns set in water to attract shrimps or ʻoʻopu fish; a net was placed under this bundle, and the fish shaken into it.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow leaves; to leaf out
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make numerous; to assemble, as of numerous persons or animals; numerous
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to supply, apportion sufficiently, equip
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to take, 
   • pretend to take, 
   • deduct,  deduction, 
   • subtract; subtraction,
   • minus
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolawehala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• accusation; to accuse; 
   • to grow worse, of a sickness, especially an insignificant one
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to consecrate, dedicate, sanctify, bless, hallow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻa hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dedication of a house; to dedicate a house
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻa waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blessing of a canoe launching; to dedicate a canoe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻalaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻolāʻau, insist, urge...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clear up, brighten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to be still; 
   • to poise aloft, as a bird;
   • to quiet, as a mob; 
   • to cease talking; 
   • calm; peaceful, quiet
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻilaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of laʻilaʻi₁, light-hearted...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to get something in the eye
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolehelehe kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lehelehe kiʻi, indolent talker; to do nothing but talk. lit., image lips...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolehelehe nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sullen, obstinate, sulky, pouting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reduce to ashes, cremate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swift, expert, strong
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolehulehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a multitude; to increase into many
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. of hoʻolei to cast, throw, heave, toss, pitch;  to put a lei on oneself or on someone else
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleilei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolei, to scatter, toss about, swing, dandle, as a baby; to juggle; juggling
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place to throw things, as a trash heap
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleinamoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>couch (probably, from  hoʻoleina moe, place to sleep)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleinawao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of wild taro. lit., thrown [into] wilderness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cast, throw, heave, toss, pitch; 
   • to stretch, 
   • send
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolele kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>A game played only at Malamakī, Puna, Hawaiʻi. A player would hold a ti leaf in his hand, chant ʻO kēlā kī, ʻo kēia kī, na Kamohoaliʻi kaʻu kī, lele!. That ti, this ti, my ti is for Kamohoaliʻi, fly! If the wind was right and the chant correctly rendered, the ti would fly off and return to the sender. lit., make the ti fly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolele lupe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fly a kite. (-lele lupe)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleleaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to project, as magic lantern slides
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolelekē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game of tossing ti leaves into Malama Crater at Puna, Hawaiʻi, and dedicating them to Ka-moho-aliʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolelele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lelele, to beat swiftly, as the heart; to frisk, hop about, romp, caper; inconstant, promiscuous; at intervals, here and there...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>[Note:  the hoʻolele entries are listed altogether under lele₁ in P&E.]
   • to cause to fly; 
   • to fly, as a kite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to disembark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to embark, as on a project.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to palpitate, as the heart
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolele₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enlarge or project, as pictures.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stretch, pull back, as a bow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut, tear; to stir, as water
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, to soil. caus/sim of lepo₁, dirt, earth, ground, filth, rubbish, silt, soil, excrement; dirty, soiled...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolewalewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as lewalewa₁ to float, dangle, swing, hang, oscillate...; to cause to dangle
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolewalewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of fish net suspended from a canoe in the deep sea
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to float, as a cloud; to lift up and carry, as on a stretcher; to suspend
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rotate the hips in dancing, sway. see song under Hōpoe₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolewa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>funeral
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause pleasure, joy; to praise, please, delight, extol; praising, eulogistic
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoleʻoleʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agitated, stormy, tempestuous; rising and falling as waves; disturbing confusing; uneven, as a pavement or a wrinkled mat. also hōleʻoleʻo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gird. caus/sim of lihi₂, small quantity, particle, a little bit, minutia; slight...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolikelike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolike, same as the more common hoʻohālike, to compare, contrast, make alike, resemble, copy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolike₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as the more common hoʻohālike, to compare, contrast, make alike, resemble, copy...; to equalize, make alike, translate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolikiliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tighten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolilina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heir, inheritance, legacy, estate, heritage, bequest; successor (so used in the official English version of the Constitution of 1852, Article 25). also hoʻīlina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoliliʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of liliʻu₁, scorching, burning, smarting, as salt in a raw wound or pain in the eyes...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provoke jealousy; jealous
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rippled surface of the sea, as caused by fish; undulation or vibration of light in the hot sun; to ripple, vibrate, undulate; to close or blink the eyes in bright glare. also holili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolilo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to transfer, assign, as in legal transactions; to export; change, reduction, as in fractions
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>expense, expenditure; to spend; to lose; to buy or sell
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scar
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoliuliu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prepare
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoliʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to decrease, lessen, make small
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoliʻoʻliʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of liʻoliʻo₁, bright, dazzling, dazzled...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoliʻuliʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a delay, prolong, procrastinate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stretch, extend, prolong, lengthen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to obtain, find, get; product, answer, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolohelohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lohelohe₁, to listen carefully, eavesdrop...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to delay, make slow, detain; to go slowly, procrastinate, dillydally lag
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolohilohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolohi,  to delay, make slow, detain; to go slowly, procrastinate, dillydally lag...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to ask the lawyer; 
   • to show off knowledge; 
   • to ask bewildering questions as a lawyer might
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to insinuate, suggest, implant a thought, either good or bad
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to pour, as rain; 
   • to disturb; 
   • agitated
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolokuloku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• downpour, 
   • to be angry.     redup. of hoʻoloku
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lola₁, drooping, hanging downward; droopy, sluggish, lazy, idle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololalola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lolalola, redup. of lola₁, drooping...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lole₂, to unfold, turn inside out, reverse; to strip or peel off, as bark; to skin, flay; to scalp; to handle, turn over with the hands...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to change, convert, exchange, alter, transform, take a new form, amend; amendment, change...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lolia,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololiloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of loliloli₁, changing, turning, changeable...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lengthen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololohe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to listen carefully; to strain the ear to hear
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololohe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lolohe₂, stubborn; hard to move, as a rock...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to hoʻolohi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻololōiele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lolōiele, dull...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to listen, hear, 
   • obey; obedient, 
   • attentive...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolonolono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻolono
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hook, catch with a hook; to put on a hook, as bait
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rare caus/sim of loua₁, pas/imp. of lou₁, hook...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lengthen, extend, prolong
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoloʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to droop. caus/sim of loʻu, to overhang, as a cliff; to bend over, as with grief or laughter; bent over, as a laden branch...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act or dress like an old lady; to try to be like one
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluaiele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of luaiele₂, swaying...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolualuaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻoluaʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of luana, to be at leisure, enjoy pleasant sorroundings and associates, live in comfort and ease, enjoy oneself, relax, be content...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• emetic; causing vomiting; to cause a vomiting, 
   • to feign vomiting; 
   • to gag; 
   • to drive out people
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bake in the oven. cf. hoʻolua under lua₃ and kālua
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do twice, repeat, do over and over; to bake twice, as food in the oven,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of luhe, to hang down, overhang, sag, droop, wilt, wither...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluhi hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to oppress, harass, burden to no use
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluhiluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make tired, disturbed, etc.; to wear one down with work. cf. hoʻoluhi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rock, as a child; to shake, as a drink; to sway. cf. mōhai hoʻoluli
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluliluli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻoluli, to rock, as a child...; to agitate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make sleepy; drowsy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluluʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻoluʻuluʻu; to cause to bend down, to load heavily
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lie quietly in calm water, as a ship in port; 
   • to be calm; 
   • to gather together, as objects, 
   • or to wait, as for transportation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to chum, for fish; this type of fishing and fisherman
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appoint as foreman, officer, etc.; to act as officer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolupalupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to flourish; lush. see nupanupa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bear many children
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lay an egg, as of a chicken
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻoluʻa. to loosen, let down, as hair; to unfurl, as a flag; to hang down
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shape a log for a canoe, as at bow and stern
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. of hoʻoluʻu to dip, immerse, dye
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻuluʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause sorrow, grief; to oppress, load down
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻuluʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻoluʻu; to set a fish trap
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dip, immerse, dye
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoluʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dip, immerse, dye
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolāhui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form a nation, race, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolāhui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be consecrated; to taboo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolālani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place in rows
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolālau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to seize, etc.; to tackle
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolālei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather together, as flowers
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolālā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to branch out, as by topping; to branch out,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolālā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lay out land areas; 
   • to mark with lines; 
   • to plan, make plans or projects.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolāpeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lāpeʻe, bent, crooked, doubled up; curled up, like the tail of a pig; coiled, flexed...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolāpuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of lāpuʻu, bunched up, humped up, curled up; crooked, bent over, arched; head bent forward, as of a bucking horse...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolāʻau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form mature wood, as of a shrub; to gather in trees, as birds
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolāʻau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to insist, urge persistently; 
   • continuously, persistently, endlessly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parsimonious, miserly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray tapa, tapa in general.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sun, put out in the sunlight ...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolīʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frighten, cause to shy, leap
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolōkahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bring about unity; 
   • to make peace and unity; 
   • to be in agreement
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻolōlō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend paralysis, stupidity; to pretend to be asleep
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to wilt, fade; to fade
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahamaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mahamaha₃, to show or feel pleasure, love, affection; affectionate...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vacation, rest
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to warm, create warmth, heat
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to leap, jump, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to unroll. caus/sim of mahola, to spread out; to smooth out, as a cloth to dry; to extend, expand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat just a little to allay hunger, as while waiting for a feast
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mock (Hal. 2.4) ; to spy, watch, as a cat watching a mouse
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahuakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show disbelief, skepticism; to ridicule, mock, as beliefs, cynical, iconoclast, irreligious, skeptical
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to chase, 
   • drive away, 
   • assist or help to escape
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mahuʻi, to guess, suppose, surmise, expect, suspect, assume, imagine; clue...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomahāha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prepare soil for gardening, to make earth soft and fine
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomailani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mailani, 
   • to extol, praise, 
   • treat as a chief or great favorite, 
   • indulge, spoil, favor...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>