<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomainaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause anger; to anger
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaka hinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to conceal annoyance or or anger by pretense of cheerfulness. caus/sim of maka hinu, bright face, cheerful look...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaka hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to begin again
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakahehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of makahehi, admiration, desire for, wonder; amazement; attractive, entrancing; to admire; be entangled...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look at with hatred; to plan revenge or evil
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of makala₁, to loosen, undo, untie, open a little, liberate or set at liberty; to remit, as a debt; to forgive; to free of defilement or uncleanness; to open or unfold, as a flower...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakamaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to befriend, be a friend to, make a friend, cause to be friends. cf. hoʻokāmakamaka
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakanahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to let a garden grow wild; wild, untamed
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakapō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause blindness, to feign blindness, to blindfold
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakapū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frown, look with disapproval
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakauliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to economize; 
   • thrifty, saving, economical, frugal; 
   • to desire, covet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakauliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek every detail; to find out even the smallest things, scrutinize.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakawela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat like a kauā makawela.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakaʻauʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang moist, as undried tapa, over a line or drying rack (haka), so that the edges will correspond and that a fixed crease will form
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakaʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look at with anger, to avoid looking at because of anger; not to recognize because of anger
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frighten, scare, terrify, make afraid; fear; to pretend to fear
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakaʻua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frighten, scare. caus/sim of makaʻua, pas/imp. of makaʻu, fear; frightened, afraid...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakaʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of makaʻē, to look at with disfavor; to look askance...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to kill deliberately, execute; 
   • to pretend to be dead; 
   • to let die; 
   • to let diminish, grow faint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakekeʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resent, resentful
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakemake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause or feign desire
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of makeʻe, covetous, greedy, desirous to have; to prize, have affection for...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open a crack; to crack
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act bravely, brave
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakua kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to act as or claim to be a makua kāne; 
   • to address or treat as a makua kāne
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakuahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to act as or claim to be a makuahine; 
   • to treat as a makuahine
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to grow into maturity, mature; 
   • to act the part of a parent; 
   • to foster, adopt, as a child; 
   • to call or treat as a parent; 
   • to address as parent, aunt, or uncle one related by affection rather than by blood or adoption
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to become established or permanent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomakākiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spy, watch, reconnoiter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause such aching
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feign friendship
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalamala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leave so as to sour, as mashed sweet potato to be eaten as poi; to ferment
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skeptical, unbelieving, irreverent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalauea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of malauea, lazy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to perform the marriage ceremony, to marry off; to force into marriage
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter, distribute
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalihia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. of mali₂, to tie, as bait to a hook...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalihini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be or act as a stranger, guest; to reveal that guests are coming, as by omens
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaliko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to refuse respect, discredit
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalimali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flatter (Hal. 78.36) , wheedle; to mollify with soft words or a gift; to soothe, quiet
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaliu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to heed, heed
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sluggish; to act drowsy, sleepy; to cause drowsiness, sleepiness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaloka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as maloka, skeptical, unbelieving, impious
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalolo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cease work for a time, recess; to adjourn temporarily.  cf. lā hoʻomalolo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of malolo₂, low, of a tide...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaloʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to dry out, dehydrate, blot; 
   • to season, as lumber;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaloʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tracing, as of genealogy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻomāluhiluhi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaluhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause or give peace, protect; to arbitrate between warring parties
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make lax, limp, weak; 
   • to relax, weaken, enfeeble;    • to shed a hard shell, as of a crab;    • to change from a caterpillar into a butterfly;    • to metamorphose. cf. lāʻau hoʻomalule kino
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalumalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overshadow, cast a shadow; shade; darken, as by a cloud
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bring under the care and protection of, to protect; 
   • to keep quiet, still, as during taboos or (modern) for peaceful meditation during hoʻoponopono family therapy;
   • to restrict, confine, quarantine.  lit., protected. cf. hale hoʻomalu, luna hoʻomalu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomalu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to judge, 
   • rule over, govern, 
   • to preside, as at a meeting; to call to order; 
   • make peace between warring parties; 
   • to suspend, as a license; 
   • probation.  
see malu₁ shade, shelter, protection, peace, control, strength (Kanl. 33.25) ; shaded, peaceful, quiet, safe; protected by taboo; reserved, held apart; taboo; the stillness and awe of taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomamae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to weaken. caus/sim of mamae, sickly, listless; weakening or withering effect of pain; wan or pale, as after illness; crestfallen, as after enthusiasm is squelched...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomamao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to keep away, keep one's distance; to go far; to remove someone to a distance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomamau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to get stuck, to stall
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanakiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>idolatrous; to worship images
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanakā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as manakā; to cause boredom
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to impart mana, as to idols or objects; to deify; superstitious
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stretch out, extend; to loosen, as a grip
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanawaleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of manawaleʻa, a generous heart, charity, alms, donation; to give freely and willingly; gratis, free, benevolent, beneficent...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanawanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>patience, steadfastness, fortitude; to have patience, fortitude; patient, steadfast, courageous and persevering; to try one's patience.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to remember, recall, commemorate, reflect deeply on, meditate. see ʻōlelo hoʻomanaʻo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place in authority, empower, authorize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to worship; 
   • religion, sect
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>callus; callous. Kauaʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻomānewanewa to display violent grief...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaneʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to itch; to tickle, ticklish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomania₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause sleepiness, drowsiness, drowsy, sleepy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to increase
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanoninia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of manoninia, pas/imp. of manoni mixed feelings as of joy and sorrow, unhappiness...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomano₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to increase; 
   • to do repeatedly or persistently
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomano₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name given to the kāmanomano plant when used in hana aloha, love sorcery
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanuheʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of manuheʻu, bruised, injured, damaged, dented; in bad condition, as an old building; to bruise, damage, injure, deface; to bite with the teeth and peel off, as bark...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break out, as with a skin eruption
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomanō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behave as a shark; to eat ravenously; to pursue women ardently
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to ask indirectly; 
   • to hint or suggest, as in asking;
   • to imply, allude
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaopopo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to understand, cause to understand, pay attention in order to understand; 
   • make plain or clear, tell clearly, to certify, inform, 
   • remember, recollect, recall, remind, 
   • realize, ascertain, recognize, discover
   • think about, 
   • believe in, 
   • take care of...    
 (Depending on context, many translations are possible; for substitution of maopopo for hoʻomaopopo see (Gram. 4.4))...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomauakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻomahuakala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomauhala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bear a grudge, cherish revenge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomauhaʻalina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to oppress, burden
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomauleho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause calluses; to oppress, overwork
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaumau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻomau to continue, keep on, persist...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomauʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to give nothing of value (probably related to the  fig. meaning of mauʻu Hilo, Hilo grass (Paspalum conjugatum), "...it's just Hilo grass."
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make fast, as an anchor in sand; to snag; to cause to be retarded, grounded, wagered, stopped
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mate for the purpose of having children
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to practice, gain experience or skill, become accustomed (less used than hoʻomaʻamaʻa)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻalea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of maʻalea, cunning, craft, trickery, deceit, guile; cunning, crafty, artful, deceitful, sly, shrewd; skillful; accustomed, skilled...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻalili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to cool; 
   • appease, soothe, quiet, 
   • pacify, assuage anger or grief
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻamau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to become accustomed, familiar
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to persecute, 
   • offend, 
   • injure, 
   • bully, tease, torment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a tracing; footprint, track, slight path; to make small fibers or threads
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reproach, sneer at, mimic, ridicule, desecrate, jeer, mock, scorn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause or feign sickness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻimaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to be sickly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause fainting; to faint; to feign fainting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dampen, moisten, irrigate, soak, saturate, baste; to shade, cool
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomaʻūmaʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of maʻūmaʻū, redup. of maʻū, moist...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk in a roundabout way, as to obtain information or conceal the truth; to hint at, trifle, joke, allude, pretend, act
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomeamea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bluff, 
   • pretend, 
   • disguise.   caus/sim of meamea₁, redup. of mea₄, to say...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomehameha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause silence, loneliness; to hush
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomeheu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a track; to follow a track, trail, trace; to lead up to deviously, as in asking a favor
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to sing or chant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomelemele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to color or paint yellow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomelomelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prepare this club; to use this club
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a decomposition, to leave (as fish) until decomposition begins
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make dull; dull
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomenemenee</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of menemene, to shrink from handling; hesitation. fig., to feel sorry, compassionate, pathetic; compassion; to fear for a loved one...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomihamiha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to decorate, dot
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomikanele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as a missionary; to ape the missionaries; to be a goody-goody
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomikioi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do neatly; to work with skilled craftsmanship; to handle daintily
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to season, salt
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomikomiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mikomiko, garnish; delicious; salted lightly; entertaining, instructive, as conversation...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomimi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause urination; to help to urinate, as a child
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomimilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to curl, twist
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻominoʻaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to smile; to smile a little
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomiona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of miona₁, swift disappearance or movement...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomiona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>creased; to make a crease
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoamoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to accompany, as a cock with hens; 
   • to care for, protect, cherish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread down, as mats
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoekolohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lead into adultery
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoemoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to lie down; to hush or put to sleep; to arrange a match; to set a line or net; to pretend to sleep.  cf. hoʻomoe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoepū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place artefacts with the dead. lit., put to sleep with
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to put to sleep, to lay down; 
   • to set, as a hen (Isa. 59.5)  
   • to set, as a fish net; 
   • to offer, as a sacrifice; 
   • to deposit, as in banks; 
   • to bring down, as a club (FS 241); 
   • to "drop" a matter; 
   • to defer, postpone, rest a while; 
   • to table, as a motion; 
   • to lay, as bricks or cement;
   • to subscribe, as to a newspaper.    
As an epithet for Kalākaua, moe probably refers to the kapu moe. cf. hoʻomoemoe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to arrange a match
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of moe₆, same as moea₂, to press onward, go straight toward...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomohala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to open, unfold, 
   • spread, 
   • recover, 
   • develop, evolve; development, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stalk; to lie in wait, as a cat ready to pounce; to trail or follow behind, sneak. Kaʻū
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomokapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to separate by imposing a taboo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flood, fill with water
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomokuāhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to divide, alienate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut and divide; a cutting, division, separation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place one over a moku, district
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomolemole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smooth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smooth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause delay; to delay
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoloā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feign laziness; to waste the time of others; lazy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomomoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻomoamoa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomomole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻomole; to hesitate; reluctant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomomona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fatten, fertilize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomomona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sweeten; candy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomomoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cook
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to follow a course, continue a procedure
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoʻolelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of moʻolelo, story, tale, myth, history, tradition, literature, legend, journal, log, yarn, fable, essay, chronicle, record, article...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoʻomoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beat raw bast into moʻomoʻo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomoʻopuna,</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim a moʻopuna relationship; to address and treat as a moʻopuna, as from affection
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to push forward, to do something first; to claim to be senior; to advance to seniority; to give the rights of seniority to a junior
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomuamua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to push forward; to act as senior
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomumuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mumuku₁, amputated, mutilated, maimed; premature, as a baby...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomumule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mumule, speechless, silent, taciturn, mute, sullen, sulky...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make bitter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mā₁, faded, wilted, stained, discolored, blushing; defeated; passed away, perished; to have lost a former attractiveness; to fade...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhanahana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make warm, heat
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhanahana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to relax rigor of taboo during a long rigorous session
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhanahana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dedicate, as a temple (FS 117); to offer first fruits to the gods
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have a division made, distribute, divide, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lead conversation towards a topic
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mahele₂, to translate, interpret...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• delightful, charming; 
   • to cast shy glances, as of a coy child
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhilu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beautify, adorn, bedeck, cf. hiluhilu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to create steam; to cook or soften food by steam; to steam
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to increase, expand, enlarge, multiply, grow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhuahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enlarge. caus/sim of māhuahua, to grow strong, as a ruler; to accrue, increase; productive, big...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhukahuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of māhukahuka, redup. of mahuka,  to run away, flee, escape, elope; fugitive...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhuā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bring bad luck, misfortune; to annoy, distress, harm; adversity
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mimic. caus/sim of māhuʻi, to imitate, ape, pattern after, do as, follow after...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāhāhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place taro tops together until they begin to sprout and are ready for planting (perhaps a contraction of hoʻomaka hāhā, to start stems)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of māikaika, same as hoʻoikaika  to make a great effort, work hard, encourage, animate, strengthen..., but less common...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause thinness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat cruelly, abuse, persecute; to cause misery and suffering
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāinoino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of māinoino, redup. of māino 
   • cruelty, misery, harm; cruel, miserable, hurt...; 
   • to torture; 
   • atrocity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to furrow, cut in ridges, cause thinness, waste away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākahakaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show signs of clearing
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as a policeman; to appoint or invest as a policeman
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākaʻikaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take others on a visit; to show the sights; to escort
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākaʻukaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scare, frighten; scared, frightened
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākeʻaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>witty, comic, funny, amusing; to cause laughter, exercise wit or humor
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause redness or soreness of the eyes
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prepare octopus in this fashion
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut into small bits, to render small or fine
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākonā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act mean, hard, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākōmakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, billowy; to increase, enlarge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomākū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to harden, solidify, thicken, gel; 
   • to lower, as clouds. 
   • fig., to show off
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālailena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause sourness; to embitter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālamalama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause light, 
   • brighten, 
   • illuminate, 
   • enlighten, 
   • inform, 
   • civilize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sm
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make buoyant, lighten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to clear, explain clearly; 
   • to calm, cheer, dispel gloom; 
   • to clear away, as brush or weeds
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālaʻea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. of hoʻomālaʻe to clear, explain clearly; to calm, cheer...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālaʻelaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mālaʻelaʻe, redup. of mālaʻe clear, calm; clear of weeds...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to calm, quiet, hush, soothe, lull, ease pain
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālielie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to comfort one who is disturbed, to soothe; to slow down
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mālili₂, ...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāloʻeloʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of māloʻeloʻe₁, tired, exhausted; stiff or aching, as from unaccustomed exercise...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāloʻeloʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stretch, make taut
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāluhiluhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause fatigue, exhaust, tire; tiresome, exhausting, toilsome
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomālō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make straight, firm, as a cord or sail; to tighten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāmalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to protect; to make shady; to cast gloom
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāmā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lighten, as a load; 
   • to ease pain; 
   • to cheer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānalonalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mānalonalo₁, redup. of mānalo₁, sweet, potable, mānalo₂, appeased...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānalo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to remove bitterness or saltiness, as of overly salty salmon
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānalo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appease, assuage, or mollify, as a god; to neutralize, as a curse
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānaʻonaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a sensation of horror, grief
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to harden, raise calluses; to strengthen, make steadfast
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānewanewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to display violent grief; to free oneself from black magic and regain health by extravagant conduct, as going nude or eating of filth or drinking ʻauhuhu juice
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānewanewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat unkindly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāneʻoneʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tickle, titillate. caus/sim of māneʻoneʻo₁, redup. of maneʻo itch; itchy; smarting...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomānoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thicken
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāpu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of māpu, fragrance, especially, wind-blown fragrance; wafted; bubbling, splashing, as water; dipping, swooping. fig., surging, as emotion...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bruise, sprain, beat down, as by heavy rain or sea; to crush, as a leaf for a poultice; to cause a sprain; to ripen bananas by burying in a leaf-lined pit
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāuiui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ask over and over, mull over in the mind
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to waste, 
   • spend carelessly, 
   • abuse; 
   • to help oneself lavishly, as to drinks
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāunauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to waste, squander
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a crack, furrow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻakaʻaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻomākeʻaka, to cause laughter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beginning
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻauea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to laugh at, ridicule, mock; to disregard
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻauē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mimic speech in a nasty way, to mock, annoy thus
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻoʻeha
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of māʻele, same as māʻeʻele  numb, as a foot that has "gone to sleep"...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻewaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to purge oneself of the effects of black magic by performing a prescribed humiliating ceremony, as walking about naked; 
   • jeer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻeʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause numbness, shock, great love
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show (demonstrate)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻikeʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show, reveal, make known or comprehensible
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻinoʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to defame, slander, deface
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻiuʻiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to keep at a distance, avoid
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of māʻiʻo₁, to cut raggedly and unevenly, as cloth or hair; dented; chipped, as crockery...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act bold, impertinent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻokiʻoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make streaks, cut grooves
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat all one wants, to feed all that is wanted
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻopaʻopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fatiguing,  fatigue
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for hoʻomakaʻē
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomāʻūʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to moisten, dampen, wet, as earth about plants
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for  hoʻomoku, to cut and divide; a cutting, division, separation...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomōakaaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>explanation, definition; to explain clearly, clarify, define
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomōhalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slacken, relax; to cause relaxation, ease
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomōkākī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to litter, scatter, cause disorder or untidiness, disarrange
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomōʻali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make an impression; scar, tracing, groove
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomūkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of mūkā, sound of lips popped open; clicking sound, as in urging a horse to speed up; smack, as in eating...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sit in silence, to refuse to answer; speechless
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻomū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as mū₃; multitude, crowd; to cause a gathering
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause shortness of breath
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soften, as earth for planting. caus/sim of naele₂, stretched out of shape; yielding, soft, miry, spongy; misshapen; swamp, mire, bog; to stretch...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonahoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to challenge. caus/sim of nahoa₁, bold, defiant, daring...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to chase, cause to run
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bite, cause a stomachache; to pretend to bite
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smash, shatter, crack, split; to take a purgative
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaikola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show contempt, as by destruction
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonakaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nakaka, redup. of naka₂ crack open...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonakeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a rattling or rustling noise
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonakele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nakele, soft, boggy, slippery, yielding, sinking in; a shallow boggy area...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of naki, same as nākiʻi, to tie...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonakoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brave, daring
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of naku₁, to root, wallow, as a hog; to tread, trample, push, as through mud or grass; to struggle; to roil, as water; to delve, search.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonakuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apathetic; lack of interest
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonakulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nakulu, dripping, as water; patter, clatter, rattle, echo; rumbling, as the stomach; grumbling; vibrating, as thunder; to spread or circulate, as rumor...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be lost; to conceal, secrete, put out of sight
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonalonalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• hidden; 
   • to cause to disappear, 
   • camouflage.  
   cf. manaʻo hoʻonalonalo, ʻōlelo hoʻonalonalo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form waves
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonalulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a pain in head or stomach
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pretend to speak in a foreign language, to mutter, mumble, speak gibberish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nanaka, marked in sections, as a turtle's back or breadfruit skin...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonanana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nanana₁, to flutter, as wings...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonanauha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nanauha, same as kākāuha, rigid...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make riddles, speak in parables
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonanea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass the time in ease, peace, and pleasure; to relax, lounge, repose; absorbed, contented...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonanenane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as above; puzzling, riddling; figurative.  see ʻōlelo hoʻonanenane
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to beautify, adorn, trim, decorate, decorative, 
   • glorify, honor, exalt, praise, adore; glorifying...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaninani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beautify, adorn
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonanā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• aggressive,
   • looking for a fight, 
   • threatening; 
   • to antagonize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause delay
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonape</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nape₁, bending and swaying, as coconut fronds; surging, as the sea; to rise and fall, as the chest in breathing; yielding, springy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonapele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as above; to wound, to make soft; to digest, as food
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to shake, revolve, sway, rock; 
   • to disturb
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonauki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>causing irritation; aggravating, annoying, exasperating, provoking
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaʻanaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to protrude
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaʻauao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to educate, instruct; educational, instructive, civilized
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonaʻaupō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause or feign ignorance; ignorant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make dirty, soil
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deprive, make destitute; to deny , impeach
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as above
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to polish, smooth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nene₁, to stir, show animation, move, as a fledgling...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lay waste, devastate, make destitute; desolation; turning to naught
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneoneo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻoneo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonepu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause plumpness, swelling; plump
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of newa₂, to reel, stagger; dizziness, vertigo; dizzy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to move, 
   • shift, 
   • hitch along, 
   • push ahead...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneʻe hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to back up, as a car
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneʻe mua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause progress
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneʻeneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of neʻeneʻe₁, redup. of neʻe,  moving along little by little...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneʻineʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of neʻineʻi₁, same as neʻeneʻe₁, moving along little by little...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoneʻineʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of neʻineʻi₂, short, small, as clothes; low-lying, squatting; crowded; to shrink, a small bit...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make smooth and even, as in carving; to remove all vestige of vegetation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of niania, redup. of nia smooth...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonianiau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻoniniau
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• following swiftly and silently; 
   • continuing; 
   • prolonging; 
   • copying, imitating
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonihinihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nihinihi, fastidious, overly strict, finicky, decorous, dainty. Also lihilihi...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lay stones interlocking; to set stones, as in a fence
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonihoniho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make into a toothed, scalloped, notched design; to make teeth; to carve an irregular notched edge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soil, make dirty
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniniau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻoniau
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoninihua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ninihua, resentment; resentful...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause dizziness;
   • to spin, as a top
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of niniʻo, same as ʻōniʻoniʻo, spotted, streaked...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonipo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make love, court, woo, yearn for
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonipo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause sleepiness, make drowsy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoniua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to spin, whirl, stir
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to cease, as a taboo; to free from taboo; to repeal, revoke; to adjourn, as a meeting; to prostitute, as one's daughter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to free from taboo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoenoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻonoe. cf. lāʻau hoʻonoenoe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoho papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to arrange, put in order
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoho paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of noho paʻa, to live permanently; to settle down; to be established...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonohonoho helu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to calculate, compute, figure
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonohonoho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to pretend to be possessed by a spirit; 
   • to arrange, classify, organize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonohonoho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam (uhi) having tuber with white flesh and red skin; vine and its wings green, petiole red, veins of blade red and green
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bone hooks lashed together
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to summon a spirit to possess
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoho₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to take up residence; 
   • to install, establish, provide, seat, locate, 
   • arrange, pack, regulate, 
   • convey, carry,  
   • appoint; to place in authority; 
   • to set, as type ...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonohu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scowl, frown
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonohu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reef, as the sails of a ship
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of noi, to ask for something, request, solicit, appeal, apply, make a motion, move, propose, plea; proposal, request, petition, motion (in documents of the 1860s, often preceded by the article ke)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of noke, to persist, continue, repeat, persevere, keep on; perseverance, persistence...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>awkward, without skill
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nolu₁, springy, elastic, soft, yielding, boggy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonolunolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name for the straight portion of a canoe rim
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonome</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to munch, move along
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonomenome</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻonome; to move the lips silently, as though speaking to oneself
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to work slowly and with disinterest; to be a slowpoke
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻononi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to create a disturbance, cause trouble, incite
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻononohuā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to nurse jealousy and ill will; to hate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻononō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nonō, to snore, gurgle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to throw, pelt; to put forth physical effort; to strain; to pretend or cause to throw.  cf. haʻanou
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonoʻonoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to think, reflect; reminiscent, recalling to mind, remembering.  cf. more common hoʻomanaʻo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to sulk; to sulk
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonuhanuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻonuha
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to enlarge, 
   • increase, 
   • multiply, 
   • magnify, 
   • exaggerate, 
   • add to, 
   • dilate; 
   • multiplication; 
   • to increase in volume, of music; 
   • crescendo mark in music...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonuinui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to use threatening language, usually without carrying out the threat; to exaggerate, stretch the truth, talk verbosely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed (Laurencia obtusa var. racemosa)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonupanupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻolupalupa to cause to flourish; lush
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to heap up; 
   • to give generously and continuously; 
   • to indulge, as a child; 
   • surging, rising in swells, as the sea
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonuʻanuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻonuʻa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat heartily
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to relieve pain, soothe, comfort, 
   • quiet, appease, lull, placate, make calm, pacify, 
   • console, find solace; 
   • to end, as a taboo; 
   • to settle a claim...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a blundering, wandering, as by misdirecting; to procrastinate, waste time through blundering
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonākelekele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nākelekele, redup. of nakele, soft, boggy, slippery, yielding, sinking in...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonākuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nākuʻi, to rumble, roar, thump; rumbling; beating, as the heart; thrilled (perhaps naku₁ + -ʻi, transitivizer)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonākū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to suffer gas pains
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonānahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn into charcoal, as burnt wood
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonānawaū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be weak and unhealthy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonānā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to look, show
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāueue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to sway back and forth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nāuki, vexation, anger; to harass...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāukiuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻonauki; to provoke, annoy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provoke to anger by taunting and teasing
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāwali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause weakness; to enfeeble; to feign weakness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāwaliwali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of nāwaliwali, redup. of nāwali, weak...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonāwele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as nāwele
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• teasing, 
   • fretting, 
   • appealing
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonīele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>questioning, especially by leading up indirectly rather than directly; quizzing; curious; curiosity
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonīnau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ask a question; to have questions asked; to ask indirectly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonōʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a burning
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to moan, groan, sigh, hum, roar, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻonūkeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to twist the face to one side
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻooloolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to elongate. caus/sim of oloolo₂, long and narrow, as a head; elongated, oblong, oval...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaepae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to build up a paepae (platform) or a taro embankment; to finish a space in quilting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaepae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopae, bring ashore, cast ashore...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bring ashore, cast ashore, to cause to land, reach shore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to build up an embankment, row, cluster
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be ensnared; to ensnare, deceive
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻopakelo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahemo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to slip, slacken, loosen, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to slip, slide; to make smooth, slippery; to smooth with oil, as the hair; to lubricate. see ex., kū₁₃
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tell lies
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make shiny, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to push, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have a nightmare; nightmare; to haunt; to bring bad luck; unlucky
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exhaust the soil; to let the land rest and lie fallow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spoil, wreck
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahāha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause swollenness; to hoist the shoulders; to strut
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to explode, set off, as dynamite or firecrackers; to blast, blow up
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopahūpahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup.  of hoʻopahū; to drum or stamp with force; to squeeze certain types of small fish so they burst
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to encourage, cause to rouse, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaiho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to peel
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of paikau, to march, drill, parade, pass to and fro; to practice firearms...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopailani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make or treat as a favorite. caus/sim of pailani, similar to mailani, to praise, but often pejorative; to spoil...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopailua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause nausea, vomiting; nauseating, sickening, revolting, disgusting, loathsome
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of paio, to quarrel, argue, fight; combat, argument, conflict, strife, battle, struggle; to contend, as conflicting winds...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaipai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopai,  to encourage, cause to rouse, etc . ; 
   • to promote, 
   • cheer, 
   • lobby; 
   • promotion, 
   • agitator
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk thus
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakalaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause bad luck
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakaneo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bring destitution or poverty
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakauʻaʻaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pakauʻaʻaka; provocative of crankiness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rescue, save or deliver from danger, free; to protect; to help escape...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pakelo₁, to slip out, as an animal from a trap or a fish from the hand; slippery, slick, slipping, sliding; to thrust, as a spear...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thrust out, slip out, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make smooth, as by polishing; to make slippery, as by greasing; to cause to slip and slide
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pakikī, redup. of pakī splash...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakipakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopakika
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be brittle, weak
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to splash, spatter, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakīpakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pakīpakī, redup. of pakī splash...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to burst, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopakūpakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopakū, to pop, as a Portuguese man-of-war that is stepped upon on the beach
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to fall, trip, push over; to fall
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalaheʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stain, besmear
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalaheʻaheʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopalaheʻa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalaheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to flee, chase
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalahuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to turn, fall
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalahō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to rot, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to have turned the face away, 
   • to cause to turn away; 
   • ashamed, confused, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to feign indifference; 
   • indifferent, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalakaʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peeved, resentful
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalakāhela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to curve, bend, stoop
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalaleha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to neglect. caus/sim of palaleha, indifferent, careless, slack, neglectful of duty...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalalehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻopalaleha
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalalē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of palalē₁, to speak imperfectly, as of one with a foreign accent or speech defect; to work in a disorderly, slipshod way; confusion...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalalū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sound thus
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalalū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause nervousness, weakness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to go sour, rancid
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to betroth in marriage; engaged
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ripen, turn yellow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to daub, besmear
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to fend or ward off; 
   • to separate, partition off; 
   • to defend in court; 
   • to disown
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalekana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to save, rescue
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause laziness; same as above
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drown, plunge into water, sink
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to confine. caus/sim of palena₁, boundary, limit, border, margin, juncture, separation, partitioning; terms of a fraction...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalipali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of palipali, precipitous, full of cliffs and steep hills...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause garrulousness; same as above
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to lick, to lick
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaluheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻopaluhē
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaluhē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make soft, pulpy; to reduce to pulp, cook until soft
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalupalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soften, weaken, mollify, make pliant or flexible; to feign softness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feign ignorance. same as palō₁
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopalō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act the goody-goody. same as palō₂
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pana₁, to shoot, as marbles, arrows, bow; bow and arrows; to snap, as with fingers and thumb to punish a child; to flip...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopanapanau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopanau
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopanau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to seesaw, wander, etc. ; to make the vulgar gesture
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopanaunau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopanau
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pane₁, answer, reply, response; to answer, speak...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopanepane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause controversy by arguing; same as above
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaneʻeneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopaneʻe; to keep putting off, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaneʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of paneʻe₁, to move along, bring, push along a little; pushed forward...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaneʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to postpone, delay, put off, defer, procrastinate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a closing, pretend to close
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaniniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻoniniʻo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaniolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be like a cowboy or pretend to be a cowboy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause darkness; to make mysterious, unknown, unfathomable; same as pano
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause barrenness. caus/sim of panoa, barren, arid, desert, dry, hot, parched...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopanopano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopano
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopapailua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopailua; beginning to be nauseated, first symptoms of nausea;  seasick
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopapapau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopapau
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopapau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to devote oneself, 
   • to make an effort to finish up, 
   • to concentrate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopapaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopaʻi; to move the stomach muscles, as in certain hula dances
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to place in rank or file; 
   • to put in order, 
   • to put in layers, overlay, overlap, as shingles; 
   • to make a shelf; 
   • to pack neatly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>purification of woman after childbirth, involving medicinal herbs bound to the abdomen, and a taboo on sex relations
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopau kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a truce or armistice
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopau manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to waste time; not worth doing, undesirable, unnecessary, waste of effort
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopau pilikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to attend the calls of nature. lit., to put an end to trouble
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopau ʻeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soil, make dirty
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopauaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause shortness of breath, panting, despair, etc. caus/sim of pauaho, out of breath, breathless, gasping for breath, panting, worn out. fig., discouraged, faint-hearted, despairing, desperate, weary, exhausted; to die...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopauhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to hoʻopaumanawa, to waste time; not worth doing, undesirable, unnecessary, waste of effort...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaulina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopaulinalina,  to waste time on trivials, to take life easy, relax
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaulinalina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to waste time on trivials, to take life easy, relax
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaumākō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause great grief, lamentation; to pretend grief
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaumāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soil, make dirty, smear, pollute, befoul, defile
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopauʻaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make grotesque, odd
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopauʻaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pauʻaka₃
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻa haʻawina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to study the lesson; studious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻa kuleana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>copyright; to copyright
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻa manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to keep a memorandum, make a record of thoughts, memorize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻa waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to insure property; property insurance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a prisoner, imprison, jail, prison
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻakikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• same as paʻakikī; 
   • to cause hardness, obstinacy; 
   • to pretend to be hard, stubborn, unreasonable, unreceptive
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻakope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>copyright; to copyright
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻakūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to clot, congeal, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻanaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to memorize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻaola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>life insurance; to get life insurance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to argue, dispute; argument, quarrel
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻapaʻanā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause pain to be soothed; to entertain
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻapaʻaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a crackling sound, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻapū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make crowded, covered with, stifling, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enslave, overwork, treat as a drudge, downtrodden
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be crooked, wrong, distort, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻi ā paʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make similar; to copy the clothing or manners of another, to ape, mimic, imitate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to slap, hit, 
   • punish, punishment, chastise, 
   • fine, penalty
   • pay back, seek revenge,  revenge 
   • to judge, judgment (Bib.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design with 12 to 18 ruled parallel lines on a tapa beater
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻuhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to fall into a deep sleep, as a drug
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻupaʻuhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopaʻuhia
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soil, smudge, make sooty
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat as a drudge, overwork, oppress with tedious labor
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻēpaʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be noisy, as a distant sound; to talk loudly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soak, moisten, dampen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopaʻūpaʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopaʻū
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to throw or pretend to throw
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swell, cause to swell, distend, brag, boast
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopehupehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopehu; to brag; braggadocio; swollen, billowy, as a cloud
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of peki₂, to back up, as a car...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopelapela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to befoul, make dirty or filthy, soil, pollute
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to knead
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeleki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of peleki, brake; to apply brakes...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeleleu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to spread, extend; same as above
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lie (falsify). caus/sim of pelo, to flatter, tell tall tales, lie...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopelopelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pelopelo, redup. of pelo, to flatter, tell tall tales, lie...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fold, turn, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopenu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to sop, dunk; to dunk
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopenupenu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopenu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopepehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to beat, strike, kill; to pretend to beat
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopepehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopehu; to flex the muscles or make them bulge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopepeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bend, twist, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to thrust up, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cross and tie; 
   • fig., to persecute
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeʻa kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cross the hands behind the back
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeʻahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beckon or wave, pretend to wave, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeʻapeʻahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopeʻahi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hide or pretend to hide
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeʻelulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to create confusion; confusion; confusing
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopeʻepeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopeʻe; camouflage
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiha pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to complete, make completely full, clear, intelligible
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopihapiha ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up dislike for another, to turn against another, as by telling tales or gossip
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopihapiha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fill, complete; to file, as cards; frame, questionnaire, any kind of form to be completed
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopihapiha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a ruffle; ruffler, as on a sewing machine
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sink, drown
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopihō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pihō₂, var. of piholo, to swamp, as a canoe...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shorten, shrink; to make, as a lei piki
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilapilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to allow to spoil, as fish or meat.  cf. hoʻomelu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a stench
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopili wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pili wale, to cling, etc., for no reason or cause; often used in unfavorable sense of living off other people...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilihua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause sorrow, astonishment, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause trouble, bother, disturb, inconvenience; to lead into difficulty, get into trouble, meddle
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilimeaʻai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to attach oneself for personal gain, as to a chief (often said disparagingly); 
   • to fawn; 
   • to support, especially one in the wrong. 
   (a derogatory remark alluding to people who seem to show up at mealtimes, but never when there's work to be done.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilimeaʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perjury; to commit perjury
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilipili aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim relationship to a chief, as of one only remotely related, or of one desirous of favors
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilipili ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>word play, punning; to illustrate a point with parables, stories, anecdotes
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilipili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopili₁, to bring together, stick...; 
   • to court, woo, make advances (FS 155); 
   • to associate in close friendship; 
   • to claim relationship, especially if unwarranted
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pili₃, to refer, concern, relate, pertain, apply...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mimic, imitate; repeat (Aniani)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a bad odor; to pollute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopinana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to elevate, cause to climb
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiopio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pipe on a flute-like instrument
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to conquer, subdue, defeat, make prisoner, capture, overcome
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put out, extinguish, as a light or fire
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopipika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pipika, to draw away, shrink away, as an octopus tentacle on a fire; to crinkle up, contract: to turn aside so as not to meet, avoid...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopipiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to shrink, clamp
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopipili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopilipili; to paste, glue, stick
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopipipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put close together; to squint
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopipiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopiʻipiʻi; to set a high price
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopipī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smoke, as ham. caus/sim of pipī, sputtering, smoldering, to snort, sniffle...; squinting; twinkling, as stars.  fig., barely surviving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻi aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of piʻi aliʻi, to claim chiefly blood, whether or not it exists...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as piʻina
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quilting in a direction away from the quilter. also hoʻopiʻipiʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻipiʻi ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause controversy, words of anger, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻipiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sail, beat, or tack against the wind; to regurgitate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻipiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopiʻina₂
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻipiʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up ill feelings, to rouse anger; jealousy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cause to rise, raise up,
   • promote,  promotion.
   • mount, 
   • come up,  
   • bring forth, 
   • utter; 
   • to turn into the wind;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to mount, as of male animals; to breed, impregnate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sue, bring suit, bring a complaint to one in authority, accuse in court, prosecute, petition; appeal, lawsuit, court case, petition
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to arch, bend, curve, crook
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻoloke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause confusion, consternation, vexation; harass
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopiʻopiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopiʻo; a form of imitative magic in which the practitioner, while concentrating, touched a part of his own body, thereby causing injury to his victim's body in the same place, as a chest pain or headache. If the intended victim saw the gestures, he might imitate them and thereby send the black magic back to the original practitioner. Both practices were hoʻopiʻopiʻo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to round; to form into a round shape, as a loaf of bread
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of poehi, var. spelling of powehi dim, obscure, indistinct, vague, faint, unclear...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopoe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to revive, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clarify
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to discredit, not believe, depreciate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoheke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to squeeze out
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohihihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to confuse, bewilder, puzzle, make mysterious
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of poho₂, mortar; to knead, as bread or poi...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bruise, skin, peel, etc. cf. hole₁
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohopoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pohopoho₃, to stick out the buttocks, as in bending over to pick up something, or as a sign of contempt...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to calm, quiet; to bring into a calm, as a ship
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to break, burst; to crack, as a whip
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohāpohā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup.  of hoʻopohā
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopohō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a loss, fail; to sell at a loss
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to forget; same as poina
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopokakaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spin, roll, coil, revolve; to repeat the same story over and over
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for hoʻopōkole
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopolapola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cure, make get well; to fill out, as after sickness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoloke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of poloke, broken; broke, without funds (slang)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopololei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to straighten, 
   • correct, 
   • reform; 
   • to aim, as a gun; 
   • to be partial and treat with favoritism
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoponi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to anoint, crown, ordain, consecrate, inaugurate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>righteous, respectable, correct, upright; to behave correctly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoponopono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make ready, as canoemen preparing to catch a wave. cf.  luna hoʻoponopono, mea hoʻoponopono
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoponopono₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mental cleansing: family conferences in which relationships were set right (hoʻoponopono) through prayer, discussion, confession, repentance, and mutual restitution and forgiveness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopopohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of popohe, round, shapely; neat and trim, as flowers; roundness, a round or clean-cut object...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopopololei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of popololei, same as pololei₁  straight, upright, direct, correct, right, O.K., accurate...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopouli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to darken, make dark, blind, mislead; to pretend to be ignorant or not know
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoupou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shorten, stoop
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopowehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of powehi, dim, obscure, indistinct, vague, faint, unclear...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cover
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoʻipoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of poʻipoʻi, to conceal, as property that one does not want to share with others, or as a secret; to cover up, as the truth; to smother, as a fire; to hush the wailing of a child...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoʻopoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopoʻo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appoint a head or leader; to go ahead; to be brave
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopoʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dig, dub out
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pua₂, 
   • to issue, appear, come forth, emerge, 
   • said especially of smoke, wind, speech, and colors, 
   • hence to smoke, blow, speak, shine...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of puahi₂, same as puahia spry, quick...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appear bright, shine
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuananu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise as a wave
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuapua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopua; to appear again and again
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to flow, show, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pue₁, to huddle or sit crouched, as with cold...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to scatter, disperse, 
   • rout, 
   • blow away, blown away, 
   • whisk, 
   • crumble; 
   • fluff; 
   • gone
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuhalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pulverize or loosen, as the soil. caus/sim of puhalu₁, soft, flabby, loose, sagging, sunken, deflated; to loosen, deflate, sink, sag. fig., unenthusiastic, relaxed, weak...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuhemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to loosen, release;  listless (EH)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to blow, blow. fig., to steal
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopukakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak plainly, frankly, bluntly, crudely, without regard to feelings of others
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopukalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bring forth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopukapuka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pukapuka₁, many holes, filled with holes, chinks, cracks; pock-marked, as due to small-pox; porous, as stone; cells, as in honeycomb...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopukapuka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to keep talking, issuing, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopukapuka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopuka; to invest, speculate, search for profit
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to perforate, puncture, make a hole or opening
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to issue, as a permit; 
   • to acquit, as a defendant in court; 
   • a chant to which dancers issue
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to graduate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to proclaim, speak, say, pronounce
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuka₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to invest; to make a profit; profitable.  cf. waiwai hoʻopuka
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopukumoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>saving, miserly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopukupuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pukupuku and transitive
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulakaumaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cherish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulapula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to start seedlings or cuttings; 
   • to multiply, procreate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulapula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rehabilitate; rehabilitation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to pray, to feign praying
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulelehua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act the butterfly, to talk much but say little; frivolous
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulelehua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuluea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause body odor; to sweat offensively
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulupulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopulu₂; to make compost
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulupulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to protest, deceive; hypocrite
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wet, soak, moisten, saturate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mulch, fertilize with compost
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopumahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻopumehana
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopumehana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to warm, heat
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopunalua
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopunahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to treat as a favorite, make a favorite, indulge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopunahelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow moldy, musty; to cause mildew
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopunalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to attain or have the punalua relationship, to pretend to be a punalua
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuni wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fool, deceive easily
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopunihei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fascinate, charm, captivate, ensnare, decoy, trap
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopunipuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lie, liar; 
   • to deceive, deceitful, 
   • false
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuni₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to surround, enclose, 
   • get control of, 
   • besiege
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuni₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to be charmed by, 
   • desire greatly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuni₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deceive, fool, delude
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of puoho, startled; to cry out in alarm; fright, shock; to explode, as a lava flow; to wake suddenly; sudden appearance, as a burst of fragrance...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopupuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make ugly, disfigure, deform
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopupuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scowl. same as hoʻopukupuku
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopupule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make insane; to drive crazy; to act crazy, pretend to be crazy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pupuni, redup. of puni₁, surrounded, puni₂, fond of, puni₃, deceived, puni₄, completed...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopupū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stall; cause to get stuck (transitive); 
   • to balk, resist, hold back; 
   • bumpy, rough, as a road. Also , hōpupū, haʻapupū
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuīa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to perfume
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻeʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of puʻeʻeke, to shrink away from; to shorten, contract; to grimace...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻipuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow or increase in weight
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to heap up, collect in heaps; 
   • to frown; resentment. cf. hoʻopuʻukahua
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to choke
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻukahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as huahua; to ridicule, belittle, taunt
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻupuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clench the fist, to shake the fist threateningly
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻupuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a  mound, to mound up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of puʻō, to blaze up, as fire; to bend, as coconut fronds in a wind; to lift up; to bloom...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopuʻōpuʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopuʻō
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopā-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim.  cf. hoʻopālima
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skeptical
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhaʻohaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to mystify, bewilder, 
   • cause wonder, 
   • puzzle; 
   • transfigured
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhemahema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pāhemahema; to cause awkwardness, to fake lack of skill
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhemohemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopahemo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhenehene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pāhenehene, to ridicule, laugh at, make fun of, mock, scoff...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāheʻeheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pāheʻeheʻe₁, redup. of paheʻe₁, slippery, smooth, as a surface...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause such a wind; to blow, as such a wind, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pāhiwa, dark, to darken (note that hiwa is a sacred, desirable black that contrasts with uli)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to spread, have spread
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have mended, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhonohono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopāhono
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move sideways; to sail to windward
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāhūhū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to gush forth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to cheat
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākakaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mill around. caus/sim of pākakaʻa, to roll one at a time...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to exceed
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to increase, exceed
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākikakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopakika, to make smooth, as by polishing; to make slippery...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pākiko, temperate, abstemious, frugal, economical, skimpy; temperance...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākikokiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pākikokiko₁, redup. of pākiko  temperate, abstemious, frugal, economical, skimpy; temperance...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flatten out
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākiʻikiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopākiʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hoʻopōkole
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beat, cause to beat
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākuʻikuʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopākuʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākuʻikuʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pākuʻikuʻi₂, to argue, contradict...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākākā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shape into a low, wide door or bowl
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to imitate or act like a Chinese
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākīkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pākīkē, to answer saucily or rudely; rude, sarcastic, insolent, saucy, impudent; rudeness...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākīkī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopākī.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smash, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act as though one has plenty, to show off, as by spending in a flashy way
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākūwā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do over and over, repeat; to render commonplace or trite, as a song
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopākūā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do over and over, repeat; to render commonplace or trite, as a song
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālahalaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of  hoʻopālaha₁
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread, extend, flatten; leveling, flattening
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transitive of pālaha₂, to broil, of flattened-out flesh on coals...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>To guard, protect, as a taboo princess in a pālama.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as pālau₁; to cause to tell tall tales, exaggerate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālaulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pālaulau₁, broad, flat, extended; a wrapper, especially apron or skirt used as a conveyor; to carry in a wrapper...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to divide in fives; same as above
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopālua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to divide in two parts; double; pair
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāluku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pāluku, to beat, pommel, hit hard, thrash, pound, destroy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopānaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek revenge, reward, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻoniʻo, streaked
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause quarrel, strife; to argue
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pāono, by sixes, sixfold; to divide by sixes; to have six or distribute to six...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāpaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make crisp, brittle; to burn, scorch
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāpā-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopā-
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāpālima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to touch hands as in making an agreement
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāpā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• To touch repeatedly; 
   • to feel one's way, as a blind person does; 
   • a contest in wit (as riddling) or strength; to hold such a contest;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāpā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>repartee, banter; to endeavor to find out something or obtain something by indirect methods, by feeling out the person indirectly; to debate, argue; contests in wit (as in riddling).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāpā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a style of guitar playing in which one person strums, and the other touches the strings of the same guitar to produce certain effects; to play thus
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāweo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to turn away, snub, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make sport, cause to play, joke, playful
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blacken, blot, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāʻeli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause such digging
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāʻeliʻeli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopāʻeli
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāʻewaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopaʻewa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāʻēʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to go astray, mislead, misrepresent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopāʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put on a pāʻū
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to procure barrenness, as by prayer or medication
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopēheu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻēheu, to flap the wings; to lift up or stretch the wings
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopēheuheu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopēheu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopēkeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopēheu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopēpē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopē; to flatten; humble. also hōpēpē
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopēpē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act like a baby; infantile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to crush, break fine, mash, pulverize; 
   • to cringe, assume a humble or fearful attitude
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drench, soak
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopē₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to perfume, anoint
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopē₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pē₄, to bribe...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stingy, extremely economical, frugal; to skimp
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopīhoihoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause anxiety; to worry, excite, astonish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopīkele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dole out in small quantities
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopīpī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to sprinkle, urinate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopīʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make such a package
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopīʻena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause anger; to cause to shy; to feign anger
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopīʻōʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopiʻoloke
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behave in an ignorant manner, perhaps purposely; to keep out of sight, to stay in the dark; ignorant
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōhae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tear, as a hole in cloth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōhaku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to harden, as lava; to petrify; hard. fig., stubborn
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōhaku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to remain long in one place; to stay at home
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōheoheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to round, smooth, or shape into a knob (insulting: see pōheo)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōkaʻakaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻopokakaʻa; to overwhelm, bewilder with a succession of tasks
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōkiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claim a pōkiʻi relationship; to behave as a pōkiʻi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōkole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shorten, cut short, abbreviate; contraction
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōlehulehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beginning of dusk; to become dark
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deprive of food, starve, cause hunger; to fast,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōmaikaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause good fortune; to bless, improve, ask grace; blessing
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōnalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause blight
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōnalonalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pōnalonalo, swarming with gnats...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōnaʻanaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to confuse, bewilder
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōneko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soil, besmirch
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to revolve, spin
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōniuniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pōniuniu, grief-stricken...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōpilikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause distress, harm, trouble; to afflict
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōpō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shape or wad into a ball
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōuliuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻopouli; blackout
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to encircle, surround, besiege, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopōʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to harm, injure, distress, devastate; to cause misfortune, distress, damage
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopū paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather salt; salt gatherer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūhalahio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to chase off, help escape
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūhalalū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fill with air, inflate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūhili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blow in gusts from varying directions
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūhili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to confuse, thwart, frustrate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūhiʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pūhiʻu₁, to break wind audibly (cf. hio₃), considered rude; to cause failure by audible flatulency; a term of contempt for show-offs...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pūhā₃, to belch, burp, clear the throat, hawk up phlegm...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūkuʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to collect, assemble
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūkuʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>huddle. caus/sim of pūkuʻi₃, to sit doubled up, as for protection from the cold; to nestle together, as in embrace; to hug, huddle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūlale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up to action, hurry
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūlehulehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to collect, bring many things together
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gird on
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūliko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bud, form shoots
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūloʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blindfold, veil
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūloʻuloʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take a steam bath
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūnana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make a nest,
   • to settle in a nest or over young; 
   • to sit on eggs, as a hen; 
   • to take shelter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūnini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pūnini, 
   • to tack, as a ship; 
   • to float here and there, 
   • drift...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūnini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to demonstrate pleasure at seeing one, as a child or dog; 
   • to cling to as with delight, frisk about happily; 
   • to perform ritual with the object of pleasing the gods (rare).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūnoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dye red with this dye
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūnono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make attractive with bright or red colors, to dress or appear gorgeous
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūnonohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pūnonohu, redup. of  pūnohu₁ rise, as smoke, spread out...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to arrange in bunches
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūʻiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to startle, astonish, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pūʻulu, group, crowd, army, party, gang, retinue; to form a group, crowd; to crowd, throng, assemble...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopūʻāʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put to flight, drive in confusion
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of pū₈, to divide by lot: pebbles or seeds were placed under a tapa, and divided unseen into heaps, and the players drew to get the largest heaps...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻopū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crouch, sit dejected and silent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause rain
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smoke, emit smoke, cure by smoking
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of uai, to move, as an object; to push aside; to move from place to place, as a tethered animal; sliding, as a door; opening and shutting; to be dislocated, as a joint...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to toughen; tough, stubborn
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of uhi₁, covering, cover, veil, film, lid, solid tattooing, tent; to cover, spread over, engulf, conceal, overwhelm; to don, as a feather cloak. fig., to deceive, hide the truth...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouhiuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to prepare uhiuhi wood for house posts
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouhuhī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tease, annoy, vex, nag
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flash, as lightning. also , hōʻuila
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouiui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of uiui, redup. of ui₁, ask, ui₂, stir up...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a question to be asked, to ask
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bestir, hurry, surge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoukali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause, pretend, or try to follow, accompany, attend, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bundle up, pack up, load, as freight
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to load, as cargo or freight; 
   • to put on, as gear on a horse;
   • to send, as a letter...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rush on, as in battle; to attack, raid
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻoukiuki
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoukiuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provoke, offend, displease, irritate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make someone pay; to levy a tax, fine, assess, charge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form a tenon or post for the crotch of a rafter
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to darken, to make blue, green, etc.; to make the skin black and blue; to bruise
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouliuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻouli
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulu iʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause fish to be numerous, as by prayer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulu kauō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to inspire canoe haulers by chant and prayer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulu pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make grow well, thrive. caus/sim of ulu pono, to grow well; progressive, thriving, successful...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulu ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow food plants; a prayer to bless crops
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouluhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to annoy, weary, vex
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ulukū, 
   • disturbed, upset, 
   • nervous, agitated, perturbed; nervousness, agitation; to disturb...
   • restless, 
   • depressed,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulumāhiehie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to adorn, 
   • decorate attractively
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause passion, possession, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouluulu lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hula altar where fresh leis were placed during hula instruction
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouluulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of uluulu₂, Redup. of ulu₂ possessed by a god...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouluulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wrangle, snarl, snag, taunt, rouse to anger, excite
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouluwehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bedeck with plants; to adorn, bedeck, decorate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouluwehiwehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of uluwehiwehi, redup. of uluwehi  lush and beautiful verdure...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouluāoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to create confusion, excitement; to incite, stir up bedlam, cause trouble
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stir up, excite, 
   • inspire, 
   • taunt. 
also, hoʻūlu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make an umu; to pile in a heap
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻounauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻouna, to send, transmit, send on an errand...; sorcery
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoune</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of une, lever; lever on a sewing machine that raises or lowers the presser foot; to pry. fig., to urge, disturb, harass...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻounuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have something translated, withdrawn, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻounu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to place stones; to pave, macadamize
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻounu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to massage with the palm of the hand and with quick movements rather than gentle pressure. caus/sim of ʻunu, to shorten, hoist, jerk upwards; to pull or draw together, as the hair...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻounā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause weariness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of uoi, to move along, of many; to slouch along together...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouweke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open a little. caus/sim of ʻuweke, same as ʻuwehe₁, open...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouwā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻuwā, to shout, cry out, yell, sound loud, shout, racket...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouwī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻuwī₁, to squeak, squeal; to gnash, as teeth; such sounds...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouāniʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stiffen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause weeping, make someone cry
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouēuē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to imitate wailing; a wailing dirge. caus/sim of uēuē, redup. of uē cry, weep...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouʻiuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beautify, make attractive
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻouʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beautify, make beautiful
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to choose, pretend to choose; finicky
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowahalehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stretch the mouth with fingers; to stretch out of shape, as the mouth
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to talk excessively; 
   • to make faces; 
   • to make an opening or furrow; 
   • to dub out a canoe, hew
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of waha₃, 
   • to carry on the back, as a child; 
   • a load so carried...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behave like a woman, effeminate, feminine; to imitate the ways of a woman; to grow into womanhood; to have the manners and ways of a lady; to become a wife; to obtain a wife (rare); to take a wife
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowahāwahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of wahāwahā, 
   • to treat with contempt, scorn,  ridicule; 
   • despise, abhor,
   • be disgusted, 
   • defy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to disgrace, put to shame
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaianuhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cool, make fragrant and cool
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaiho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leave, abandon, ignore, shun; to expose or leave naked
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enrich, bring prosperity
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowalania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause pain, wound
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowalaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause talk, start talk or conversation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowale hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unreliable, fickle, unstable; slippery and amusing, as in speech
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowalea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of walea₁, same as nanea:
   • interesting, of absorbing interest; fascinating, 
   • to have a good time,  enjoyable; 
   • repose, tranquility; leisure, at leisure, 
   • relaxed, at ease, 
   • amused, 
   • engaged with, busy with;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowalewale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tempt; entice; tempter, temptation
   • decoy, 
   • lead astray, 
   • beguile, 
   • fool, 
   • take advantage of;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make soft, smooth, as soil, 
   • to mix, as poi or dough; to mix fine particles with liquid to form a semi-liquid, as poi (NKE12). 
   • to digest;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowawā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of wawā, 
   • tumultuous; 
   • racket, roar: 
   • loud talk, 
   • echo, 
   • sound of distant voices,  
   • rumored, talked about, 
   • resounding, repeating 
    (see hānau wawā)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaʻawaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act the fool
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowaʻawaʻalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of waʻawaʻalia, same as waʻalia to dig a trench... cf. waʻa₂ trench, furrow...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to open, undo, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beautify, decorate, adorn
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowehiwehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decorate, festive. redup. of hoʻowehi
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoweke, hōweke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to beat, 
   • burn, 
   • arouse passion
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoweli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frighten, terrify, arouse fear
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoweliweli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to threaten; 
   • terrible, 
   • fierce...; 
   • to frighten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoweuweu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fluff. caus/sim of weuweu, herbage, grass, greenery; bushy or fuzzy, as a beard; fluffy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hurry, hasten
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to wind, coil, twine, 
   • drill, 
   • turn; 
   • to mill about, as a school of fish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowilimoʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as wilimoʻo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowilimoʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremony during luakini or war temple dedication. for a pule hoʻowilimoʻo see (Malo 185)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowilimoʻo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quadrille dance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowiliwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻowili; to swirl, circle
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sharpen, make a point
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowiʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to smart
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowiʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to besmear, soil
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowiʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to entangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a sound, roar; to cause gossip, talk. see ex., haʻanou
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowāhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of wāhi, to cleave, split, burst through, break through; to change, as money; to have sex relations with a virgin, deflower...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻowīwī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make thin, slenderize; to diet in order to lose weight; to reduce
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to split, crack
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoīkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put or throw ashore; to float, strike, drift
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to moisten, soak, wet. also , hōʻū₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoūpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crush, belittle, flatten, treat contemptuously
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻieʻie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻieʻie₃, high, conceited...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻihaʻiha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bloated, uncomfortable
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to harm, injure, damage, abuse, insult, malign
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻiʻika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to contort the features; to pucker, shrink, contract, wrinkle, scowl
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻulua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to assemble
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻumeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to assume the shape of a bowl; to assume the shape of fruit, to bear fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻumiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shape a gourd for a drum, as by tying. caus/sim of ʻumiki, same as ʻūmiʻi, clamp, clip... ...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻuʻuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make small, reduce, lessen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grunt and strain, as with physical exertion (Kep. 159); to mourn. also , hōʻū₁
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻoʻūmalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cast a shadow, overshadow, frown
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻuwīʻuwī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hōʻuwī
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻā ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to set on fire, to kindle fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāeae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a style of chanting with prolonged vowels and fairly short phrases, much used in love chants; to chant in this fashion; to read or recite Bible passages or multiplication tables
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāhewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to find guilty, pronounce guilty, convict, 
   • blame, condemn, 
   • curse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāhiahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to become evening; to spend an evening; to detain until evening; to darken, obscure...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a narrow escape; to escape by a slim margin; to have courage; to put forth great effort...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāhonui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ahonui, patience; patient, enduring, long suffering; to tolerate. lit., great breath...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to pile, heap up; mound. 
   • collect; collection, gather, accumulate, 
   • to lay away, as goods for the future; 
   • fig., to resent, dislike
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pile up or heap up; embankment
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make shine a little; 
   • to open the eyes a little to see; 
   • to peek
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāiwaiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mystifying, causing wonder; to mystify
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākaaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clarify, explain, render or make intelligible, provide clearly for, prescribe, describe; explanation, clarification...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>precautionary; to take precautions. caus/sim of akahele, slow or moderate, cautious, careful, prudent...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of akakū₁, vision, trance; reflection, as in a mirror; hallucination; to see a vision...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākakū ānuenue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of akakū ānuenue, the phenomenon known as the Specter of the Brocken, seen at Haleakalā Crater. lit., rainbow apparition...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākamai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make wise or smart; 
   • to make a pretense of wisdom; 
   • to show off, display erudition; 
   • theorist
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻākaʻa, to tear off, peel; to break open, as a seal; to fall off or down, as old thatching of a house; to break up, as the sides of a house; to uproot; ruffled, as feathers...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to widen, broaden, extend, enlarge, broadening, expansion; extension; 
   • make public; 
   • to escape (rare)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākoakoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to assemble, congregate, muster, throng; to collect, gather...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deify, make a god of; godlike, supernatural, extraordinary, divine. cf. hoa kua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻākuleana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to give or delegate responsibility. caus/sim of ʻākuleana, to give property or a right to it; to delegate responsibility...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāla kuahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chant said at the construction of a hula altar (kuahu hula), calling on the gods, especially Laka, to possess the altar
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāla pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a summons sent at night
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻālaala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cf. ʻoālaala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻālahia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to awaken; wakefulness, insomnia. caus/sim of alahia, rare pas/imp. of ala₂, to waken, stay awake, ala₃, to rise up, arise...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāla₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to arouse, stir up, incite, 
   • renew, restore, revive, to restore, as a building; 
   • raise; 
   • summons
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻālia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stop, check, restrain, wait
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāliali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whiten, cause to shine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻālikiliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻālikiliki, to tighten, tie tightly...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a chief, establish royalty in office; to imitate royalty; to treat as royalty; regal, royal, kingly; to be made an officer, be commissioned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to signal, wave; signal,
   • to stir, as coffee or a fire;  stirring; 
   • wavy, undulating.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>To make an offering to the gods with signals and signs or prayers with gestures. cf. mōhai hoʻāli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāloa loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to keep at a distance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻālohaloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make love, 
   • express affection, gratitude or compassion; 
   • expression of love or affection (FS 93); 
   • to give thanks (I Kor. 11.24); 
   • friendly, loving, lovable
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻālualu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of alualu, 
   • to follow, pursue, chase; 
   • to run, as for political office...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāmana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to give authority, authorization; to empower, authorize, commission. cf. kula hoʻāmana, charter school.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make measurements, rearrange, put in order. also hoʻoana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻānaʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to withhold for the future
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to beckon, wave, signal; 
   • to let wind
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>holy, devoted to sacred use, hallowed, solemn; to reverence, sanctify, attribute divine honor, hallow. [NB: hoʻāno, listed under ano in the 1986 edition of PE with the 1991 preface,  is misspelled as hō.ano, and in the examples below as Hōano and hōano. In the 1986 edition with the 1984 preface, it is misspelled hō.ʻano, Hōʻano, hōʻano. It is respelled correctly here, as in the 1965 and earlier editions, and as in the Hawaiian Bible. The "Ē kō mākou..." of the Lord's Prayer example in the 1986 editions has been rewritten here as "E ko mākou...", the spelling of the earlier editions and the Hawaiian Bible.]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻānu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cool
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻānuʻunuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to vibrate, undulate, 
   • wave, wavy, as hair
   • to jerk, 
   • make steps;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to marry; marriage
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāpipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to join, couple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to approve, approved,  approval, approbation. 
   • accept, justify, sanction,
   • find not guilty in a trial; 
   • worthy;    
see ʻāpono to approve, confirm, justify, ratify, recommend, commend, consent, accept, endorse, adopt; to pass, as a bill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāpuka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻāpuka₁, to swindle, cheat, defraud; forgery, embezzlement; fraudulent...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāpuka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻāpuka₂, to emerge, come into light...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāuau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hoʻāu₃, to set, as a net or fish trap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāuau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hasten, hurry, rush, excite to action.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāuhuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of auhuli, to overturn, overthrow, upset; to till...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flock, collect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to float, as timber. caus/sim of au₃, movement, eddy, tide, motion; to move, drift, float, walk, hurry, stir; succession or train, as of thought, trend...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dedicate, set apart, as in a housewarming
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to set, as a net or fish trap; fishermen who set nets in kuʻu fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāweʻaweʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻāweʻaweʻa₁, faint trace, spot, glimpse; faint, dim; streaked, faded...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāwāwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a groove, furrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāʻiaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to whiten, whitewash, white, 
   • clear, 
   • shine, shining. 
   • remove rust or dirt; 
     fig., to clarify, brighten, as a tarnished reputation
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻāʻīpuʻupuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appoint or make one a steward; to act as one, as by waiting on the table; to issue provisions
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to set on fire, burn, ignite; to light, as a lamp. 
   • fig., to incite, arouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻā₇, to drive, as fish or cattle...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk a lot, jabber
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēheu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flap the wings; to lift up or stretch the wings; to undulate the arms in a hula imitating a bird in flight; to flap the arms, shrug the shoulders; to pull up shoulders proudly, hence to be proud
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drive or shoo away; to stir, as a fire. see -ēhu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēmi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reduce, diminish (Puk. 21.10) , lessen, draw back, curtail, discount. see emi₁ to diminish, reduce, depreciate, grow smaller, subside...; lower the price, cheapen; cheap see emi₂, cheap...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēmi hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of emi hope, to return, go backward, withdraw, back up...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēmiemi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to retreat, 
   • lag, hesitate; 
   • to lower a price, 
   • to bargain   
caus/sim of emiemi, lowering, decreasing, diminishing, dwindling, lagging slowly; backward...  redup. of emi₁, to diminish, reduce, depreciate..., emi₂, cheap...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēmu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of emu₂, to rid plants of weeds...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēwe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ēwe₁, sprout, rootlet; lineage, kin; birthplace; family trait; to sprout...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise or swell, as surf; to mount, as a surfer mounts a wave
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻēʻē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to keep away from, avoid
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>See iho, to go down, and -iho.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīlewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pain of hunger. cf. houpo lewalewa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīli kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to attack in war
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīlina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heir, inheritance, legacy, estate, heritage, bequest; successor...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to land upon, load, as freight on a ship; to transfer, consign, transmit; to set on shore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bequeath or leave in a will; to lay aside, save.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to feel the discomforts of pregnancy; 
   • to suffer emotional disturbance; 
   • to yearn for an absent lover; 
   • to be imbued with (often used favorably)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīlo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land term of unknown meaning used in the 1840s, perhaps a winter-time plot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīnana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to animate, give life to
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīnea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause hardship, distress
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻīnu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to give to drink. also hoʻoinu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōeoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stretch out, as the neck; to reach high; to prolong, as a sound; to toll; to yodel
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōheke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause shyness, to be modest
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōhelohelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to color pink
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōhemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause weakness; to pretend weakness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōhewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bring on drunkenness; drunk, incoherent
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōhewahewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōhewa drunk, incoherent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exclaim, cheer, shout, halloo.  cf. hoʻōhooho below and kiko hoʻōho.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōhooho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōho
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōhule₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause baldness; to shear the hair completely
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōhule₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>complete defeat, as in card games, whitewash (keep opponent scoreless, slang)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass oneself off as a native son; like a native son
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōkaoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pulverize, cut into little pieces.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put an end to, terminate, conclude, annul, finish, stop; end.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōkohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a scab to form, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōkohekohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōkohe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōkomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻōkomo, to insert, include; to calk, as a ship; to inlay...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōkomokomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōkomo caus/sim of ʻōkomo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōkupe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trip someone; to stumble or pretend to stumble
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōkuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to squat, crouch, perch; to crouch, perch
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōla hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to restore to life, revive, resurrect
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōla pānaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to redeem, ransom; redeemer
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōla₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to save, heal, cure, spare; salvation; healer; savior...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōla₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small piece of tapa; tapa in general (Kauaʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōlepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to turn, shut, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōlepelepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōlepe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōlohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻōlohe₁, bare, naked, barren; hairless, as a dog; bald; destitute, needy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōlohelohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to denude. caus/sim of ʻōlohelohe, redup. of ʻōlohe₁ bare, naked, barren; hairless..
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōluheluhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause limpness, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōmalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cast a heavy shade; overcast
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōmalumalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōmalu, to cast a heavy shade...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōmamaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ōmamaka, same as ʻōmakamaka  redup. of ʻōmaka₁; to leaf out or bud afresh...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōmaʻomaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make green, paint green
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōmo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw in, as a wave. caus/sim of omo₁, to suck, absorb; suckling; to gasp...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōmou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to pin, to pin, to pretend to pin
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōnaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to be stooped, bent, bowlegged; to imitate the walk of a bowlegged person
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōnaona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to impart fragrance; attractive, sweet, alluring
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pumice; to rub and polish with sand
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōnea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause desolation; to desolate
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōneanea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōnea
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spin, as a top; to cause to whirl
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spot or print with colors, as tapa
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōniʻoniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻōniʻoniʻo, embroidered (Biblical); mottled...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōnoʻonou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻōnoʻonou, to force upon...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōnēnē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻōnēnē₁, fretful, fussy...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōnū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to swell, expand
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make lopsided; misshapen
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpahapaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup.  of hoʻōpaha
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut in ʻōpaka fashion
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to litter, make rubbish, strew, soil, make untidy
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• treacherous, 
   • overturning; 
   • to cause to twist, cross, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause a cramp, numbness, etc
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make young, freshen, refresh, rejuvenate; to act young
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpiopio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hoʻōpio
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōpulepule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of ʻōpulepule₁, moronic, somewhat crazy, psychotic. see pule and ex., ʻōhewahewa...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻōʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mix
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cause to enter, put or dip in, thrust in, insert; to reach in
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to provide food for a journey
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻūlala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behave as one crazy; to cause craziness
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻūlili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act like the tattler bird
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻūlu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up, inspire, excite, taunt. also hoʻoulu
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hoʻūouo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caus/sim of uōuō, redup. of uō bellow, roar...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huana Pelenana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Juan Fernandez.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hua₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the thirteenth night of the lunar month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hua₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a strong northwesterly wind of the winter months. Also Kiu Inu Wai and Mālua Kiʻi Wai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huhui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pleiades.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hui Heihei Moku Pākīpika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pacific Yacht Club. lit., Pacific ship racing club.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hui Keʻa ʻUlaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Red Cross.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hui Moku Holo Piliʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Inter-Island Steam Navigation Company.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hui Mokulele Piliʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Inter-Island Airways Company.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a surfing wave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huihuikōkōamakaliʻikauiluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name for Pleiades. lit., Makaliʻi's net hanging above.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huihui₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pleiades.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hukekona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hudson, as the river or bay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hukuenoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Huguenot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hulialopali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind at Lahaina, Maui. lit., turn to the face of the cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hulona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Huron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Humumā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for the cluster of three stars in a row in the constellation Aquila. lit., Humu and companions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Humuʻula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a place on the slopes of Mauna Kea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Humu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the star Altair, in Aquila, said to have been used for navigation from Hawaiʻi to Tahiti. Also Hoʻohumu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hunakalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hungary; Hungarian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huna₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eleventh night of the month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hunekali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hungarian, Hungary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Huo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of an unidentified star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua alakaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a leading note in music, the major seventh of any scale, a semitone below the tonic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua aniani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glass bead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua hapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>half note, as in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua hapahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quarter note, as in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua helu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a few, little.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua hoʻoneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>combination, as of a safe. lit., number to make move.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua hoʻonoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua hāule wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>also said of a sweet potato produced from the extended vine as distinguished from the product in the hill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua hāʻule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fallen fruit or seed. fig., friendless, uncared for by parents or chief; bastard, illegitimate child (modern); foetus lost through miscarriage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua hōʻailona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small letter, small fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an only child or offspring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scrambled eggs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kalakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bur.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tone in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seed, as of mango; bulb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kineko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jacinth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kukaima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mandrake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kukui (candlenut) nuts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alphabet. lit., basic letters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kēpau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>printer's type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua kōkua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grace note in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offspring of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua lewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ʻōhiʻa or ʻōhiʻa ʻai fruit uses as medicine (Kam. 64:103, 141); perhaps also a kind of wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua lili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blasted fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua liʻiliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>berry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua liʻiliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grace note in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua liʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small or inferior fruit; runt; small, puny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua liʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small letter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua loaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>product, answer, as in arithmetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua mele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>notes in music; words of a song.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua mua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offering to a Congregational church of the first earnings in a new job or undertaking; offerings in gratitude for a particular success, as a big fish catch. lit., first fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua mua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>initial letter, first word.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua māhoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a two-note chord.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua nanai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the hinahina root when used in hana aloha, love sorcery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua nui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large fruit; to be fruitful, productive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua nui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>capital letter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua palaoaʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rye (Secale cereale).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua palapala hiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>italics.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua palapala leo hui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>consonant. lit., letter joined in pronunciation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua palapala leo kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vowel. lit., letter pronounced separately.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua palapala nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>capital letter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua pale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barley (Hordeum vulgare).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua pākā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scrambled eggs, omelet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua pāma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>date. lit., fruit of pāma, date palm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua pōpolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pōpolo berry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grape, grapes (Vitis spp.). lit., wine (Eng.) fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua waina maloʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>raisins. lit., dry grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edible fruit or seed. cherries (HE)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua ʻalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>missing letter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua ʻaluʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>egg with a very soft shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua ʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whole note in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fruitless, unproductive, worthless, sterile, unrewarding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua ʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>child born out of wedlock, that is accepted by the husband or wife of the parent and treated as his own. lit., strange fruit. Kaʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua ʻōlelo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an affront to a family ʻaumakua god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pill, tablet. lit., seed to swallow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaale hoʻomoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sleeping tablet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahekili uka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native naupaka (Scaevola kilaueae) found only on dry lava near Kīlauea Volcano. It does not exceed a height of 80 cm, has narrow, thick leaves, dull-yellow flowers, and small black fruits that were used to dye tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahekili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hail. lit., thunder fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahekili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rare name for the beach naupaka (Scaevola) plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahualau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interrogation to incriminate, ensnare, or obtain information by roundabout methods, to question or quiz indirectly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahuaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to boil up, as water in a spring; 
   • to gush forth, effervesce; 
   • culmination of sexual passion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fruitful, productive, prolific; to bear many fruits; to lay many eggs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>testicles. see insult, loaʻa … kāu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huahua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a vulgar gesture of contempt made by thrusting the thumb between index and middle fingers with the fist clenched, or the fist held up to the face and the eyelid drawn down. With the gesture one sometimes said, "Eia kāu ʻo ka huahua," "Here's your huahua gesture."
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huakaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• trip, voyage, journey, travel, 
   • procession, parade; 
   • mission, quest (NKE12), adventure (Hopita).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huakaʻi hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>travels, a long trip; to keep traveling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huakaʻi hoʻohanohano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honor escort.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huakaʻi kaʻahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tour; to make a tour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huakaʻi pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night procession or parade, especially the night procession of ghosts that is sometimes called ʻoiʻo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clear as crystal, bright, dazzling, white, shining, flashing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shadow, reflection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full and plump, as a healthy person; well proportioned, as a properly built canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hualala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>curved, warped, oval, twisted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hualani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hualau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana. lit., many fruits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hualele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seeds of the laulele plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hualele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hernia. lit., flying testicles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright, polished, clean, pure, white, glittering, gleaming; morally pure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hualūkini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>musk, as used in making perfume.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huamailani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., fruit from heaven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huamakani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny, yolkless egg. lit., wind egg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huamoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round-ended bone entering the hip socket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huamoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of house with thatch purlins separated by a width of three fingers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huamoa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gushing forth, overflow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huapalaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wheat. lit., flour (Eng.) grain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huapala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>orange trumpet or sweetheart vine (Pyrostegia venusta syn. Bignonia venusta, B. ignea), an ornamental climber from Brazil, bearing early in the year many deep-orange flowers, hence chestnut-colored or light brown. lit. ripe fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huapala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sweetheart, lover; 
   • pretty, handsome.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huapala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chestnut brown.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huapoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bones of the side of the head; side of the head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huawaimaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>collection of dew or rain water, pool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nutmeg, spice. lit., fragrant fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boiling up, opening, uncovering: to gush forth, as lava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to disclose, reveal, uncover, as an oven; 
   • to disinter, dig up, 
(hu₁ + -aʻi, transitivizer).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pour forth, break forth;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to churn water, as a ship propeller
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the red sandalwood tree (Adenanthera pavonina), from parts of tropical Asia and Malaysia, of moderate height and with rather widespreading branches. The tree is planted in parks, and its round, lens-shaped, red seeds are used for leis, and their long, yellow-lined pods for decorative arrangements.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very sour, of poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huaʻōlelo hoʻohuiʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>compound word.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round object, as pill or bead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• result, effect; 
   • credit, as for a university course.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>testicles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• word, letter, figure, 
   • watchword, rallying cry, 
   • note in music; 
   • winning word in the Chinese gambling game of chee-fah; 
   • type; 
   • to speak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hua₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the bulging of the broadest part of a paddle blade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue mānalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an edible sweet gourd.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue nuku pueo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of gourd with a short beak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gourd water container, water bottle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue wai pueo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water gourd shaped like an hourglass. lit., owl water gourd.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue wai pūʻali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gourd water container with constriction about the middle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue wai ʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long-necked water container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue ʻawaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of bitter gourd, as used for utensils.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue ʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container or bag for liquids made of animal skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huehue haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wild passionflower (Passiflora suberosa) with small greenish-yellow flowers, small three-lobed or undivided leaves, and blackish fruits 1.3 cm in diameter.  lit., introduced huehue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huehuelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tail end, as of a strip of pandanus plaiting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huehue₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pimples, acne; to have pimples.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huehue₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native climber (Cocculus ferrandianus), with oval leaves and bluish one-seeded fruits. The stems were used for twine and for funnel-mouthed fish traps. (Neal 354.) Also hue ʻie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chilled, benumbed, as of one shivering in this wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huelo māewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tail end, especially of a junior line of a lineage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hueloelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tail-like, having tails.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huelopoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whaleboat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huelopōpoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Australian bluegrass, Andropogon sericeus. lit., cat tail. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hueloʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sting, as of a scorpion, lit., bitter tail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hueloʻīlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small shrub (Buddleja asiatica), native of southeastern Asia to Java, growing wild in Hawaiʻi, related to the summer lilac. It has narrow leaves and small white flowers growing in long narrow clusters. lit., dog tail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huelo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tail, as of dog, cat, or pig; train of a dress; tail-end, last. fig., inferior.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huelo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hop vine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wheezing sound, as of asthmatic persons; a prolonged shrill cry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hueʻie₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>demijohn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gourd, water calabash, any narrow-necked vessel for holding water, flask.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• quick, as in stealing or deception; 
   • light-fingered;
   • to steal, filch, 
   • move fast; 
   • to work the rope fast in skipping rope; 
   • theft (rare).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of hula dancing, usually at the end of a program, a kind of ʻai ʻami with a revolving of the hips as fast as the drummer can beat time, to see who can dance longest; to dance thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hue₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a way of connecting net sections by, interlocking meshes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>possibly a redup. of hue₂, fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insect-eaten, rotten, worm-eaten, wormy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuhue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to filch repeatedly, to steal in company.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuhui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to meet as equals, as two beautiful persons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuhula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian hula by many persons; to hula, of many.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuhulei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lifting, tossing about, trotting, sporting, leaping, twisting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuhuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn, seek frequently.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuhune</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of hunehune and hune₁,₂; fine, dainty; stripped of all property.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhui helu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>logarithm. lit., number collection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhui palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ears of grain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhui waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster of grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster, collection, swarm, bunch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pull hard or frequently.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hula dance by many; to dance the hula, of many.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek, turn, of many and repeatedly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bristling, tousled, as feathers, fur, body hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhulu kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise, as fur of an angry dog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>particles, fragments.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhune₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skin eruption on animals, as hog, dog; to have such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhupaolāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wood borer. fig., slanderer, defamer. lit., borer that digs wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuʻailāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wood-eating borer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably a redup. of huʻe; to cease, quit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a wood-boring insect, termite; 
   • worm-eaten, rotten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pet, cherish, as animal pets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huhū wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short-tempered, peevish, cantankerous, angry without cause.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui hali ukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>express company.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui hoʻopaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insurance company.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui hōʻaiʻē kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>credit union. lit., society [for] loaning money.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui kahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>united in one; in accord and agreement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui kahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>girded in malo or pāʻū tightly fastened with a single hitch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui kinai ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire department.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui kālepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trading company, mercantile firm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui malū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any secret society or fraternity, as the Masons; Masonic; to meet secretly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui o Papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Chorus of Papa, a prayer for the purification of women uttered in the early morning at the Hale o Papa, house of Papa, a temple reserved for women.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui puhi ʻohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>band (musical).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mix, unite, blend, assemble, combine, mingle. see ʻAmelika Hui Pū ʻIa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>incorporated, united, joined.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui ʻuwī waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dairy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huihui maka liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huihui ā kōlea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather together like a flock of kōlea birds. fig., to gather together to help one another in time of trouble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huihui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed, mingled, united, joined; to pool together, as to buy cooperatively.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huihui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster, collection, bunch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huihui₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>constellation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wheat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huikala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to absolve entirely, absolution;
   • forgive all faults, excuse, pardon, 
   • atonement, 
   • cleanse and purify morally; ceremonial cleansing.    cf. (Malo 199).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed, confused, haphazard, blurred; mix-up, confusion, jumble; to mix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huikaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mix or jumble, make disagreeing statements, put several stories into one. (hui₂ + -kaʻi, transitivizer).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huila kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disc wheel of a sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huila makani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pinwheel. lit., wind wheel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huila nihoniho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stitch regulator of a sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huila nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large wheel; flywheel, as of a sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huila wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water wheel, windmill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huilapalala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wheelbarrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huila₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wheel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina alanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crossroads, street corner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina helu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sum of several numbers, total.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina helu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general arithmetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina koho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>purchase price, as at an auction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina kūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>right angle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina loaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gross profit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina peleleu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>obtuse angle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina pū kuni ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>battery (artillery).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster of grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina ʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acute angle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>geometric figure. See huinahā, huinakolu, and others.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahiku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heptagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quadrangle, quadrilateral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā hiō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>figure with four equal sides but oblique angles, rhombus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā hiō lōʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oblique parallelogram.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>square.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>square. lit., equal square.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā like ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quadrangle with unequal sides.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rectangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā lua like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quadrangle with only two sides parallel, trapezoid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinahā pāʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>children's blocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinakolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinakolu kūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>right-angle triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinakolu like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>equilateral triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinakolu peleleu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>obtuse triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinakolu ʻaoʻao like ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irregular triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinakolu ʻelua ʻaoʻao like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>isosceles triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinakolu ʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acute triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinalima₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pentagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinalima₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joining of two hands, especially in hand wrestling (uma).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinalāʻaulana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>raft. lit., collection of floating logs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinaono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hexagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinapapalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>raft. lit., collection of floating boards.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pool, meeting place of two or more streams.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huinawalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>octagon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sum, total, amount.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unit, cluster; military detail or detachment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>angle; corner, as of a house or street; crossroads, intersection, junction, juncture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huina₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tie or slur (music).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>needle-pointed, sharp-pointed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp, shrill sounds; to make such shrill cries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huini₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden peg used in mending bowls.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huipaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>syntax.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huipa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of hard, black stone used for maika stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huipa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whip; to whip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huipuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of pāʻū (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conjunction (the part of speech).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huiʻapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of stone, as used for making maika stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a prayer on the morning after ʻanāʻanā sorcery.  (Pronunciation uncertain: perhaps huʻi.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to join, unite, combine, mix, come together with; combination. See hui pū and saying, nāwao₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a plus sign.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster, as of grapes or coconuts; bunch, as of bananas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chorus of a song.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flippers of a turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small uniting stick in a thatched roof, supporting rod for purlins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hui₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to disperse, as a meeting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huka pihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buttonhook; to hook a button.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukahūkai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>somewhat insipid, brackish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukailoloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who has long served a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hook, as on a door, shoes, clothes; to hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>advice, information.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a balm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki leo paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke that impedes speech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pull or work together, cooperate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw water; one who draws water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jerk, pull hard or suddenly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukiheʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukiheʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine-meshed net used for fish fry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukihuki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to pull or draw frequently, or by many persons; 
   • to pull by jerks or continuously, as in the tug-of-war game (see hukihuki₃); 
   • to gather, as taro; 
   • friction, dissension. (see hukihuki₂)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukihuki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to disagree, quarrel; disagreement; not cooperative, headstrong, obstinate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukihuki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tug-of-war game; to play the game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukikū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snobbish, haughty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukikū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uncooperative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seine; to fish with the seine. lit., pull ropes (lau).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pulling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a fit of any kind, convulsion, stroke, spasm, epileptic fit; 
   • twitching, cramp, as in the leg; 
   • to have a fit or cramp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hula step: one foot steps to the side, the other foot is pulled toward it so that the heels almost touch, and then is taken to the opposite side.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, tender, as cooked meat that pulls apart when picked up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huki₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twisted, drawn at the mouth, as a result of illness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hukopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hyssop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>protuberance, lump, projection, elevation, jutting out, heap; to protrude, jut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huku liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small protuberance; small, little.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula Pahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fast hula that increases to a frenzy, said to have been named originally for a mele maʻi named Pahua [pahua₁] (shoved). Emerson (UL 183–5) calls it a stick dance and gives an example. To perform this dance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula Palani paʻi umauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of chest-slapping hulas performed for Kalākaua's coronation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula Pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred dance in honor of the goddess Pele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula honu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hula in which the dancer imitates the motions of a turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula hoʻonānā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any hula for amusement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dance of the images in which the dancers postured stiffly like images; to dance thus. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dance with marionettes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kolili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dance with love forfeits, similar to those in the kilu and ʻume games.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kuahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>altar hula, any hula taught with ceremonies and an altar, contrasting with hula ʻauana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kuhi lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sitting dance with gestures of hands and swaying of torso
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kuolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sitting chant dance; the performer beats the gourd drum (ipu) and chants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any interpretive hula, so called since the days of Kalākaua; lit., joined hula, i.e., old and new steps were joined together .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kuʻi Molokaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the punch (kuʻi) hula of Molokaʻi, an ancient, fast dance with stamping, heel twisting, thigh slapping, dipping of knees, doubling of fists as in boxing, vigorous gestures imitative of such pursuits as dragging fish nets, and unaccompanied by instruments. This dance originated on Molokaʻi, an island famous for sports. Many of the songs contain taunts, as a laʻa kō kū i ke aʻu, now you are jabbed by the swordfish. cf. hula kuʻi under kuʻi, joined.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula kōlea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kneeling hula imitative of the kōlea, plover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula lāʻau pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of hulas performed for the coronation of Kalākaua, probably stick hulas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula manō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sitting dance imitative of sharks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula muʻumuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sitting dance...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula mānai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dance with a thin flexible stick which the squatting dancer beats time as by striking the floor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula nemanema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of hulas performed for Kalākaua's coronation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any sitting hula; to perform such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula pahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dance to drum beat, perhaps formerly called ʻai haʻa (UL 103)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula papa hehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dance in which the dancers use the papa hehi, treadle boards; this dance is said to have originated on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula peʻepeʻemakawalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a spider dance with stiff legs, dancers hopped, right foot forward and left in reverse; then opposite, keeping time with a boisterous chant and with hands fluttering vigorously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hula dance in which the hips sway from side to side in imitation of a fat hog's waddling. Also ʻami puaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula ʻauana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>informal hula without ceremony or offering, contrasted with the hula kuahu; modern hula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula ʻiliʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hula in which smooth water-worn stones are used as clappers or castanets; the pebble hula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula ʻulīʻulī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hula with ʻulīʻulī, gourds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula ʻīlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hula imitative of the movements of a dog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula ʻōlepelepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of hulas performed for Kalākaua's coronation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulahula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ballrom dancing with partners, American dancing, ball; massed hula dancing; to dance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulahula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twitching, fluttering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulahula₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremonial killing of a pig and offering it to the gods during the long ceremonies dedicating a luakini temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulahē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jump for joy, cavort with happiness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulali₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• shining,  to shine,
   • glittering, glitter, sparkle, 
   • glossy, 
   • reflect light.
   • slippery;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulali₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of loli, sea cucumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hulā, 
   • to prod, pry, 
   • uproot, 
   • pierce and penetrate, 
   • expel, 
   • reject...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulaʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where it is necessary to swim past a cliff that blocks passage along a beach or coast; sheer cliff where the sea beats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>song or chant used for the hula; to sing or chant for a hula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hula₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to twitch, as a muscle or eyelid; to palpitate, throb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulehulei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>repeated motions or lifting; to seesaw.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lift, raise, draw up, as a skirt; 
   • to pull, pry; 
   • to pitch and toss, as a ship on the waves; 
   • to move along, as a ship; 
   • to flap wings; 
   • to trot, as a horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huleilua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intensifier of hulei; to toss and pitch, trot, swing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huleʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of soft pumice stone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli alo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn toward; to face one another.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diligent in work; to seek work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to search here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>profound study of earth, geology; to do such. cf. (RC 433).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to turn back; 
   • inverse, as in math.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>profound studies of any kind, moral philosophy, social science, anthropology; to do such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli kua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn one's back, refuse to help, ignore; one who does so, as one who is offended.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli kua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>back section, as back house wall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn in two directions or twice; to shift, as the wind; unstable, shifting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli manaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek an opinion; to change an opinion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli mio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taro stalk with spent strength.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli pau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overturn completely; to search everywhere; said sometimes as equivalent to modern "bottoms up", toast, instead of the vulgar "ōkole maluna".
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli pewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• twists of the tail; 
   • fig., passing of time.    
See pawa₁ and pewa₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overturn, turn upside down, overthrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulialana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to remove the bitterness, especially to pour off the bitter liquid and add fresh water to the preparation of arrowroot (pia).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huliau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turning point, time of change.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huliau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to think of the past, recall the past.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulihia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pas/imp. of 
     • huli₁, to turn, reverse; to curl over, as a breaker; to change, as an opinion or manner of living; 
     • 
huli₂, to look for, search, explore, seek, study; search, investigation;  scholarship 
   • overturned; 
   • a complete change, 
   • overthrow; 
   • turned upside down. 
    Chants about Pele with verses beginning with the word "hulihia" are referred to as hulihia. See prayer, kualakai₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulihuli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulihuli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulikoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek into the depths of a matter, to describe fully; description.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulikua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ornamental comb decorated with feathers, with ornaments turned towards the back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulilau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a variety of large gourd or calabash, used as receptacle for tapa or garments, or for food offerings. 
   • fig., a woman, mother, wife.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulilau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>border, boundary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulilawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to find enough material goods, as food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dazzling light, 
   • vibration, undulation; 
   • to blaze, sparkle, dazzle, glare, 
   • vibrate, 
   • swell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulilī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shiver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulimaiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a reddish-brown honey-sucking bird (no data). lit., banana seeker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulimoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to turn and rush; 
   • to pour forth, as a cloudburst;
   • to stampede.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulina alo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>facing, face to face, opposite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• turning, turning place, 
   • overturning,
   • reversing, 
   • frontage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a searching, seeking; search.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft and sticky, glutinous, gluey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulinuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>highest rank or grade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulipahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second mate of a vessel. lit., binnacle turner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulipeua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greedy; a greedy person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulipoepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>globe. lit., revolving sphere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulipūloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huliāmahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to join together in great numbers to cooperate; to act with unanimity, as a political party.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huliāmahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong, as the sea. [see (Gram. 8.7.2): huli-ā-mahi 'turn like a strong (cock)'; i.e., cooperation, strength. see mahi₂: strong, energetic, as a worker. moa mahi, fighting cock.]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huliʻaoʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lean over to one side, tilt, turn to the side.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>section, as of a town, place, or house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taro top, as used for planting; shoot, as of wauke (see ʻae₇).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huli₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trump or winning card.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>royal favorite and loved one; royal feather.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu hipa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sheep wool, fleece; woolen cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu koʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long tail feathers, as of a rooster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu kupu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pinfeathers, new-grown fur.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu kupuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the precious few living blood relatives of the grandparent's generation (a term of affection and pride).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu kuʻemaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyebrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu kākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pen, quill for writing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu makua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>precious parent or relative of the parent's generation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu manu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bird feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu manu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>green seaweeds (Caulerpa spp.), growing like land plants, with roots, prostrate stems, and leaflike divided fronds; not edible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu manu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>court favorites of Kamehameha III.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu pena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paintbrush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu piʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>body hair, animal hair, or feathers standing on end.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small, matted, red seaweed (Spyridia spinella), its many branches covered with short bristles. It is rather common in shallow water near shore. It is eaten in South Hawaiʻi, but not generally elsewhere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu weuweu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>downy feathers or beard, fuzz.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻaina ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an esteemed, beloved person well cared for. lit., choice one not rejected.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻāʻīlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horse's mane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻīlio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine, red seaweed (Centroceras clavulatum), forming short, dense, regularly branching tufts, with tiny forked tips; not edible. lit., dog fur.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻīlio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine, branching, edible brown seaweeds (Ectocarpus spp.), forming short, olive-brown clumps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻīlio₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine, branching, green seaweed (Cladophora nitida), forming flexible, long, bright-green tufts; said to be edible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻīlio₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine, feathery, green, fresh-water alga (Stigeoclonium amoenum), found in streams and ditches; said to be edible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻīlio₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine, unbranched, green seaweed (Chaetomorpha antennina), looking much like hulu ʻīlio₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻīlio₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine, nonedible, brown seaweed (Sphacelaria tribuloides), densely tufted, shorter and darker brown than Ectocarpus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu ʻīlio₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>some kinds of Polysiphonia seaweeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu waena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an irregularly branching, dark-red seaweed (Grateloupia falicina) with many narrow segments. It is commonly eaten and is sold in some markets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu weo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bristling, glowing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhuluaʻīlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a green, velvety, carpet-like mountain moss. The spore cases rise above the plants. lit., fur like a dog's.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>body hair, hair of eyelashes, fleece (Lunk. 6.37) , wool, fur; hairy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frayed, splintered, rough, not smooth, shaggy, bristling, feathery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blanket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>down or fuzz on plant stems, rootlet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kinds of seaweeds and mosses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluhulu₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flannel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hului₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of bag fish net; to drag such a net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hului₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take or grab, as winnings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulukoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bird crest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulukoaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hululua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hook with two barbs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulumanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tick used for mattresses and pillow covers, so called because they were stuffed with bird feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulumoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Hawaiian mistletoes (Korthalsella spp. formerly called Viscum), small plants perching on trees and extracting part of their food from them. They have flat or cylindrical jointed green stems. lit., chicken feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluokaʻauhelemoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a moss said to grow only in Pālolo Valley, Honolulu, named for Kaʻauhelemoa, a legendary cock defeated in battle by a hen. She pulled out his feathers, which fell and became this moss. It is used in leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulupala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light brown, bay, as a horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulupuaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beard hanging from the breast of mature turkey males. lit., hog hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluʻiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pig that is reddish-colored about the hams. lit., ʻiwi bird feather.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluʻānai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scrubbing or painting brush, formerly made of a coconut husk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huluʻānai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sea urchin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>esteemed, choice, precious; esteemed older relative, as of parents or grandparents' generations. (This meaning may be connected with the value attached to featherwork.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fur, wool, fleece, human body hair (contrasting with lauoho, head hair).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind, nature, color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hackle; fishhook with barb on the outside.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>muscle attaching a bivalve to rocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seal, named for its valuable fur.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulu₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to prod, pry, 
   • uproot, 
   • pierce and penetrate, 
   • expel, 
   • reject
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hulō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hurrah, cheers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hume</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bind about the loins, as a malo; 
   • to put on a malo; 
   • to wear a sanitary napkin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a girding on of a loincloth; part of the loins covered by the malo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu hoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>back stitching; to sew with back stiching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu hoʻoholoholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>running stitch, basting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu kaulahao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chain stitch; to make chain stitches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu lala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sew in a diagonal line.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu peʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sail-making; to sew sails.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu puka pihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buttonhole stitch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu hiʻu kole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pinktail durgon (Melichthys vidua). lit., red-tailed triggerfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei triggerfish (Sufflamen bursa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu mimi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bridled triggerfish (Sufflamen fraenatus). lit., urine triggerfish, so called because of its odor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu puke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bookbinding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu puke ʻili lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloth bookbinding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu puke ʻili pepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paper bookbinding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu ulana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to darn, as socks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu umauma lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of humuhumu fish (Balistes bursa). lit., humuhumu with leis on its chest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black triggerfish (Melichthys niger), used as fuel when fuel was scarce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumunukunukuāpuaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>varieties of humuhumu (Rhinecanthus aculeatus, R. rectangulus). lit., humuhumu with a snout like a pig. [In l984, the reef triggerfish (Rhinecanthus rectangulus) was selected as the official State Fish of Hawai‘i after a popular vote and the approval of the State Legislature.  The State Fish’s official term of office lasted five years, and there was no re-election campaign.  In May of 2006 Governor Linda Lingle signed a bill that permanently established the humuhumunukunukuāpua‘a as the State Fish of Hawai’i.]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sew, of many or continuously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trigger fish. The name humuhumu is qualified by the following terms (in addition to those listed separately as identified): kapa or kapu, lei , māneʻoneʻo (said to be irritating to the mouth), ʻuwīʻuwī (thought by some to be the young of the māneʻoneʻo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro with coloring like that of the humuhumu (fish); the leaf stem is pink at base, dark-purple midway and green above.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dark-colored birthmark, believed to be the result of the pregnant mother's eating humuhumu (fish).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to destroy, ravage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuhumu₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humukā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cross-stitching; to do cross-stitching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to embroider.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sewing, seam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuniki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pattern in pāwehe plaiting, said to consist of a continuous row of red lozenges with their lateral angles touching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humupapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sew to a backing, as feather leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humupaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lock stitch, a stitch that does not loosen easily; to sew thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overcasting stitch; to hem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuʻula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red jasper stone, as used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humuʻōmou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stitch used in tacking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to sew, stitch; seam, stich; 
   • to bind together parts of a fishhook; 
   • to bind, as a book.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>humu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hole by which parts of a hook were bound together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea spray, sea foam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a battle unit, either a single individual or a group of men; host of an army.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust particle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna olonā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>waste and refuse of olonā after the fiber is cleaned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna pakēpakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of Hypnea, a seaweed. lit., brittle huna.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drop of water, spray, mist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna wailele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spray from a waterfall.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunaahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire spark, live cinder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunahuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fragments, particles, crumbs, scraps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunahuna ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a particle, as ua, e, i in Hawaiian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunakai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white-flowered beach morning-glory (Ipomea stolonifera; synonym, I. acetosaefolia), distributed in tropical regions, with oblong to lyre-shaped leaves, and white flowers with yellow centers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunakai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sanderling (Calidris alba), a small winter migrant to Hawaiʻi, cinnamon brown with dark markings. lit., sea foam, so called from the bird's habit of following close behind receding waves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunakānaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of tapa with white and yellow dots.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>van of an army, front ranks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rear guard of an army.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>minute particle, grain, crumb, gram, speck, tiny bit, scrap, minutia; small, little, powdery. (This word is similar to hune₂.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hidden secret; hidden. cf. huna₁, a stative usually following nouns, and the transitive verb hūnā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huna₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common, fine, red seaweeds (Hypnea spp.), irregularly and more or less densely branching, thorny looking; eaten cooked, furnishes a good colloid when boiled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hune kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea spray, sea foam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hune one</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine-grained sand, sand particles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunehune₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. and intensification of hune₂, very fine, delicate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunehune₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bits, as of news, gossip; minutia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hune₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poor, destitute; a poor person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hune₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine, tiny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hunāhunā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hide frequently or be hidden by many persons; secretly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suspicion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hoop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hupau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hupilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of pilo₃. (Coprosma).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hupu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>collection; catch, as of fish. (This rare word is not clear.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>envy, jealousy; envious, jealous; to stir up trouble due to envy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huāelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Var. spelling of hua āelo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa kai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa kai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sponge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa kapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pile of tapas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa kapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taboo borders, as of a taboo place, or of the taboo enclosure where hula was taught.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa kopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soap bubble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trimmings or borders of a garment; hem of a dress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa moena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pile of mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻa kai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sponge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻa kai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea foam; crest of a wave breaking into foam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻa kai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻa kopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soapsuds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻa lana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>floating froth. fig., an ignoramus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a coarse, weedy native dock (Rumex albescens) in the buckwheat family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foam, froth, lather, bubbling, frothing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻahuʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jelly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻalepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter dust, especially a method of fighting with a club or spear in which the opponent was blinded by stirring up dust; to hit an underhanded blow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foam, froth, bubble, suds, scum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• rim, border, edge, side, hem; 
   • ruffles and tucks at the bottom of a dress; 
   • tucks in a mat; 
   • train of a gown.    
See mānele huʻa hoʻohiwahiwa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• suburb, 
   • boundary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pile, as of mats or tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to remove, lift off, uncover, expose; 
   • to reveal.
   • to unload, as a ship; 
   • to open, as an oven; 
   • to exhume, 
   • push, force, prod; 
   • to wash out, as flood waters;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻehuʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of huʻe
   • to keep removing; 
   • to take out and put in again, as furniture; 
   • to overflow repeatedly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻelepo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small hula graduating exercises held at noon outside in the dust (lepo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opening, unloading, flowing, pushing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻi lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>darting pain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ache, pain; aching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>huʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hākau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oppressive older brother of ʻUmi... see ʻUmi₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hālala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of Kalākaua's genital. see (EM 67).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hālaulani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a star, said to be observed in the month of Hilinehu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hāloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a son of Wākea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hāloa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hāmākuaikapaiaʻalaikahala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a lua fighting stroke. lit., Hāmākua of the bowers fragrant with pandanus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hānaiakamalama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Southern Cross.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hānaiakamalama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a benevolent goddess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hānaiakamalama₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of Queen Emma's residence in Nuʻu-anu Valley.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hāna₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a district and town, East Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hāwaʻe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a famous evil sorcerer. See lauhue₁, for figurative meaning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hāʻao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a rain at ʻAuʻaulele, Kaʻū and at Nuʻuanu, Oʻahu, so called because its showers follow one another like members of a chief's retinue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Hāʻena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place names on Hawaiʻi, Kauaʻi, and Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hā niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavy end of a coconut frond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hā wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water trough or pipe, aqueduct, flume. rain gutter (HE)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hā wai laweʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sewerage pipes, sewage system.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow well.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhoʻoili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hereditary stalk; established people with inherited land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhā hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grope here and there, feel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhā lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native tree lobelia (Cyanea leptostegia), found only on Kauaʻi. The trunk is slender, unbranched, to 12 m high, and bears a crown of narrow leaves that are up to 60 cm long. The many flowers are purplish-red, the fruits yellow berries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhā nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native shrubby lobelia (Cyanea horrida), from Maui, with thorny branches and rough, lobed leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manta ray, sea devil, family Mobulidae (Manta alfredi). lit., two mouths (two flap-like appendages extend forward on each side of the mouth).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhāmau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to catch fish with the hands, as in crevices.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhāpaʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salt bed or pool; to gather salt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhāʻaiakamanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native lobelia (Clermontia clermontioides), found only in high mountains of Kauaʻi, a shrub or small tree with many branches; oblong and narrow leaves; greenish-purple, curved flowers; and sweet, edible yellow berries. lit., hāhā, food of the birds, so called because the thick sap was used for catching birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grope, feel, as with the hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>hāhā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trap made of twigs and small branches, for fresh-water fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>