<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻei poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diadem, turban.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻei pāpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hatband.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻekeʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bamboo pipes, varying in length from .3 to about 1 m; usually with one end open. A player held one vertically in each hand tapping down on a mat or on the ground. The tone varied according, to the size of the tube. Several musicians might play at once. (UL 143–4), (Roberts 53) Barrèrre suggests (Barrère 1980:11) that kāʻekeʻeke as the name for bamboo pipes seems to have originated with Emerson. She quotes Andrews (who refers to (Laie)) as saying the name applied to coconut-tree drums. It is also used as a verb. Also ʻohe kāʻekeʻeke or pahūpahū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peeved, offended.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻekā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entangled, confused, twisted; to interweave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeleloi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>roll, ruffle, as of a drum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>darkened; cf. ʻele, black.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>numerous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slow, delaying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full, as a food calabash. fig., full of knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong, zealous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hair gathered in a topknot on the head, as by priests in ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeuʻeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>helpful, cooperative; joyous, active larger, bigger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeʻaʻeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>expert, hero, fighter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sea bean (Mucuna gigantea), native from southeast Asia, east into Polynesia, a high-growing vine, bearing greenish flowers and large pods, each pod containing two to four round and flattened seeds, black-spotted or brown. In Hawaiʻi, the seeds, known as pēkaʻa, are found on the beaches, and are used medicinally for their strong purgative effect and are also strung for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻeʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• hand net hanging on an ellipsoidal wooden frame with one end pointed, used for ʻōhua and other inshore fish; 
   • to use this net or a skirt of a dress in this type of fishing; 
   • to strain, as through a strainer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻiewe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>group of relatives who faithfully serve and care for a chief during illness; perhaps related to ʻiewe, placenta.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizzy, dizziness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to refuse to pay losses or 
   • forfeit, as in a game; 
   • to use another's property without permission; 
   • to usurp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine meshed fish net, similar to kāʻili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻili wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plunder, rob, seize, usually without premeditation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻilikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plunder, rob, seize, as in premeditated violence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻiliponi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to die suddenly, as by stroke or accident.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻiliʻili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• snatching, 
   • pulling, especially of a newly carved canoe hauled from the mountains to the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to snatch, grab, take by force, seize, abduct, usurp. (see song, (EM 58–9))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cast for fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine net as used for ʻōpelu fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻili₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gasp, labor for breath
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻioʻio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bear a second crop of sweet potatoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻiʻiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a climber (Strongylodon ruber, misidentified locally as S. lucidus), in the bean family, endemic in Hawaiʻi, with three-parted leaves and large seeds. The flowers are clustered, red, and shaped like narrow beaks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻiʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard, rigid; stingy, close-fisted, hard-hearted, harsh; to refuse help; to deny a request; to strut pompously; persistent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• whole, entire; 
   • separated, 
   • independent, 
   • neutral, 
   • standing apart, 
   • definite. 
    cf. ʻokoʻa, different, kūʻokoʻa, and holoʻokoʻa, entire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellowish mother-of-pearl shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻēʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joyful, glad, hospitable, friendly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kāʻēʻēʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very joyful, glad, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hit, strike, throw, smite, hack, thrust, toss, fling, hurl, dash, especially with a quick hard stroke; 
   • to bail water, as from a canoe (kā₂); 
   • to clean, as weeds or mud from a pond; 
   • to fling the arms or swing them while walking; 
   • to make net meshes; 
   • to tie, as thatch battens; 
   • to knit; 
   • to fish with a pole; 
   • to turn the soil; 
   • to turn a rope for children to jump; 
   • to remove, as a cataract from the eye with the edge of a blade of kūkae puaʻa grass; 
   • to snare, as birds; 
   • to curse (especially if used with ʻino; cf. kāmalū, to do evil to another in secret; to forbid, warn in secret...); 
   • to murder; murderous; murderer, dead shot. 
For kā i ka waha, see waha.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₁₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>czar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₁₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tar, asphalt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe bailer; to bail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beater, knee-drum beater made of dried ti leaves or braided fiber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cross-stitching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vine, as of sweet potato; to send out a vine, to vine, to grow into a vine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>root cutting, as of breadfruit; to send forth shoots.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pelvic bone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>incoming, of a current (au).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kā₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container, hanger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kēhau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a gentle land breeze, as of West Hawaiʻi; Kapaʻa, Kauaʻi; Kula, Maui; Hālawa, Molokaʻi and Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kēhela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kēkēmapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>December.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kēkēpue₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kēpia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind associated with Hilo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kēwai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a Hilo wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēhau anu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cold dew, frost.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēhaupaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēhau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dew, mist, dewdrop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Var. spelling of ke ehu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēhue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellowish, of soil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēhōhō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bray, to bray, as a donkey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēkake₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>donkey, jackass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēkake₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as piula, a card game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēkewe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bloated, swelled, as with dropsy; so fat that the stomach overhangs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēkēpue₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shun others; to withdraw from others, as in shame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēkē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distended, enlarged, as a stomach in pregnancy; big-bellied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēkē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fish (And), perhaps a variant name for ʻoʻopu hue, puffer fishes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēlau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put out first leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēlou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hook; to hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēlā…kēia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>this and that, all, every, everything, here and there; miscellaneous, various (kēlā always precedes kēia)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēlō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sail ho!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēlū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quail. The usual name is manu kapalulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēnā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to command, order, give order, summon, send on business.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sperm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• lead, pewter; 
   • printers' type; 
   • sinker on a fishing line.
   • pitch, tar, resin, gum, as on ripe breadfruit; any sticky juice, as of pāpala [shrub];
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpau kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpau kāpili mekala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>solder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpau kāpili palapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sealing wax.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpau pōkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lead, bullet lead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dandruff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sleight-of-hand trick; to play such tricks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spur, as used by horseback riders.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>zebu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēueue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to push against, oppose, seek to remove a person from his position.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēwai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• watery, dripping, 
   • misty; 
   • damp, 
   • dewladen; 
   • spoiled, of eggs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēwā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>far-off place inhabited try spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēwā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to anticipate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kēʻae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to saturate, soak in.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• protest, complaint, criticism; to criticize; 
   • critic, especially a hula critic; 
   • formerly a hula master who was invited by another hula master to criticize his class; 
   • to push, shove, struggle against, oppose, 
   • shun, avoid, abstain from, refuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clang, as a bell or gong; to dingdong, strike, as a clock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kē₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flatten out, adjust to a surrounding level, as in removing a heap of earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kē₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>player of the pūhenehene game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kē₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kā₁₀, the interj., mild disapproval, surprise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kē₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the letter "k'."
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīhaelāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breeze at Puʻuʻōhua on the Hāmākua side of Hilo. lit., to shred ti leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīkomohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Key West.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīkī-ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., red emitting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīnaʻu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kalani Ahumanu i Kaliko o Iwi Kauhipua o Kīnaʻu [c. 1805 – April 4, 1839], daughter of Kamehameha I and Kaheiheimālie, and wife of Kekūʻanaōʻa; she was the mother of Kamehameha IV, Kamehameha V, Victoria Kamāmalu, and Kekūāiwa. After Kaʻahumanu's death she became Kuhina Nui for Kamehameha III, an office she held until her death in 1839 at the age of 35 (RC 348). In a chant in her honor, Kīnaʻu is said to have been named for a mythical.bird, Kamanukīnaʻu-a-Pae. lit.: flaw. .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīpuʻupuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a chilly wind and rain at Waimea, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīpuʻupuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a company of warriors from Waimea in Kamehameha I's time, named for the wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīʻaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Big Dipper (modern).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kīʻailana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sea Island, Gossypium barbadense, a variety of cotton grown in Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī Kepanī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weed (Cassia leschenaultiana). Niʻihau. lit., Japanese ti (its leaves were used for tea).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī alakaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tonic, keynote (music). lit., leading key (Eng.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī hoʻoikaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>staccato mark (music); small dot or wedge placed over a musical note.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī hōʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slack key (the first and last strings of the guitar are tuned to D, instead of E; the strings are picked individually and are not chorded).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī kaola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crossbar or beam used to close a door or gate. lit., beam key.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wooden key or latch, as in a gate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī nehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Spanish needle (Bidens pilosa), a lowland weed; young fresh plants are still brewed for tea (kī). Similar to koʻokoʻolau, also used for tea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī pololei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoot straight; sharpshooter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī pōkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shoot, fire or discharge a gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī ʻaʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum), an aromatic herb of the mint family, with small white to reddish flowers, the leaves used to flavor food.  lit., fragrant kī.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red ti grown for ornament, long in Hawaiʻi but not native.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intensifying prefix. Numerous examples follow, including kīhelu, kīkaha, kīkākala, kīlaha, kīmanamana, kīʻoʻe, kīʻohuʻohu, kīʻōnaha.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gallop; 
   • to walk lightly and swiftly; 
   • fast movement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīauau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>encouraging workers, as in drawing an unfinished canoe hull from the forest to the shed at the seashore where it was to be completed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīauau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smooth out wrinkles from tapa or clothes with light, deft touches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tear or strip, as leaves; 
   • to remove thorns from pandanus leaves; 
   • to shred, as ti leaves for dance skirts. 
   cf. hae, to tear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inspired with a wrathful spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhakahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to force a wedge into an opening (formerly said of fighting).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhalalē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perhaps intensifier kī- + halalē.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat voraciously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>incomplete, partly finished; half-covered, as with a shawl over one shoulder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frugal, saving; sparingly; to ration carefully.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• shawl, cape, afghan; 
   • cloak of makaloa matting; 
   • rectangular tapa garment worn over one shoulder and tied in a knot; 
   • bed covering; 
   • to wear a kīhei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhei moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light bedspread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhei pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two sheets, as of printed percale or patchwork, sewn together at edges, used as bed covering over the sleeper and under the nicer quilt. In some, the lower edges are left open so that a blanket may be inserted. lit., clinging covering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhei ʻaʻahu noʻenoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decorated cape. lit., colored garment cape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīheihei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wear a kīhei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• hook; to hook; 
   • to feed poi to a child on the finger, which is bent (like a hook) so as to dislodge the poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scratch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle or basket of ti or other leaves, as used to carry sweet potatoes, flowers, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīheu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to remove tiny weeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīheʻaheʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stained, streaked, especially with red or with blood; 
   • streak of fire, as seen in the wake of a fire-brand sailing aloft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīheʻaheʻa palaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coloring matter for tapa made from the palaʻā fern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lead a roving life, without fixed abode, wander; vagabond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīholo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large wood fishhook, as used for sharks and large fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīholo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large fish net about 20 fathoms long, held by a canoe at each end.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīholo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long ti-leaf food package, more commonly called holo ʻai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>side or bank of a canal or ditch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhāpai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• small land division, smaller than a paukū; cultivated patch, garden, orchard, field, small farm; 
   • parish of a church, diocese; 
   • department of a business or office; 
   • formerly various religious duties were divided into kīhāpai, as tending the altar, offering sacrifices.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhāpai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus, syn. Vinca rosea), a perennial herb or small shrub, from tropical America, grown for ornament; flowers rose-purple or white.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>belch, burp; to belch or burp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise and pitch, as a canoe in heavy seas; to dive under water, as a porpoise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīhēhē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to be or become deified; 
   • to pass into the air or to live invisibly there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to soar, glide, poise, wheel, skim along, as a frigate bird; 
   • to turn aside, detour, veer, deviate; 
   • to maneuver, as fighting cocks; 
   • to walk along absentmindedly, ignoring everyone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkahō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to splash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkahō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak or interrupt rudely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkala hāneʻeneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pyelitis, kidney disease; sacroiliac strain; lumbosacral slipped disks. lit., sliding hips.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkala moa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a seaweed that irritates the throat if eaten alone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkala pai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flat, thin buttocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkala paʻakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare idiom referring to hard-working tenant farmers in 1851.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkalakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• hip, 
   • coccyx bone; 
   • posterior; 
   • stern, as of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cover, bury.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to give freely and with good will.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkaʻelekē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frisky, restless; to jump here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkenenei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to contract, shrink; to crouch or squat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa or sarong worn by women under one arm and over the shoulder of the opposite arm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lean over to one side, 
   • to cover one side; 
   • to turn to the side; 
   • to place in a one-sided manner; 
   • on the side, as a tapa or lei  worn over one shoulder and under the opposite arm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkepa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bite sideways, snap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkepa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>edge, rim, as of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkepa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pig of one solid color with a spot of another color on the shoulder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bend, crook; bending, zigzag; 
   • perverted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkeʻekeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of kīkeʻe, to bend, crook; bending, zigzag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to lean back; 
   • to tilt, heel, as a ship; 
   • to stretch out, extend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spiral fishhook with the end curled back fairly close to the shaft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spots, stains, blemishes; to stain, spot [contraction of kiko and kohu].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rude, sarcastic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do in irregular, haphazard fashion, as skipping about while reading; irregular.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkomo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to inlay; to mix, as sap from tree-fern fronds (palaholo) and māmaki bark with wauke bark while beating tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkomo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pole fishing in shallow sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• small adze used for smoothing and finishing a canoe; 
   • to smooth and finish a canoe; 
   • to soften wauke bark for tapa making; 
   • to pierce or lance a swelling; a piercing, 
   • to peck; a peck, 
   • to blaze, as a tree; a blaze; 
   • to rap on the forehead, usually with a single knuckle, especially as a gesture of rudeness or contempt, hence to treat contemptuously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo panakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bank check.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo pānaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bill of exchange. lit., exchange disbursement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻolā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sarcastic, rude, tart, impertinent, insolent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻolā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• haphazard, miscellaneous; here, there, and everywhere: topsy-turvy; 
   • carelessly performed, 
   • entangled; 
   • of awkward shape, as a package.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• span; extent; 
   • to stretch, reach or stick out; 
   • extend, as the hands, or as a bird its wings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a measure from the end of the thumb to the end of the index finger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chord of an arc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bent bow; to shoot, as from a bow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long surfboard, 3.7 to 5.5 m long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move; to step in order to reach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻo₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pay out money, disburse, draw money from the bank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkoʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cultivate with a hoe or digging stick; 
   • to rap or strike with a club; 
   • to tap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkā Pukikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mandolin, usually with 12 strings. lit., Portuguese guitar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkākala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike with spurs, as fighting cocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkākala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw up with a hook, as in fishing octopus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkākapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>various species of butterfly fishes of the genera Chaetodon and Cheilododactylus. Varieties are qualified by the terms alo lua and koʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkāmū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suspicious, wary; gathering in silence, as fish about a hook they hesitate to bite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkānia lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of nightshade (Solanum aculeatissimum), the round, scarlet fruits used in leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkānia pipili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Spanish clover (Desmodium uncinatum), a weedy, South American perennial herb with small clinging pods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkānia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weed (RSV), tares (KJV). zizania.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkānia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cockleburs (Xanthium spp.), coarse herbs, bearing tenacious burs about 2.5 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ʻōpelu fish, when about the length of a finger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong, energetic; having authority and force, as a magistrate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the cigar flower (Cuphea ignea), from Mexico, a small, smooth shrub with narrow, red, tubular, odorless flowers nearly 3 cm. long. The flowers are used for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkē ʻalāna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crashing sound, as of lava rock (ʻalā) smiting rock, or as made by an active aa lava flow; to sound thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkēkē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to knock, rap, tap, pound. cf. ʻelelū kīkēkē and kīkoni, to tap with a single knuckle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkēʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to argue, talk back, banter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to rap, tap, knock; 
   • to break open, as with a hammer; 
   • to click glasses, as in drinking a toast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to share.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sudden wind gust, squall. fig., sudden burst of passion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīkoʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>done to completeness, perfection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīkoʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chirping or screeching, as of a flock of birds; deep tone in chanting; tapping noise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīlona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to incite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīpalapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīpani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conclusion, last, end, every last one.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīpani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>severe stomach pains that make breathing difficult; to endure such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkīʻalo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dodge quickly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Redup. of kī₃, 
   • to shoot, as a gun; 
   • to incite or sick, as a dog; 
   • to spout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do up the hair in a type of knot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crude temporary basket or bundle, as made of ʻilima, ti, or morning-glory plants and used to carry food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkī₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird resembling the plover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkī₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given a shellfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkī₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lean back firmly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad, wide, ample, enlarged.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bracken or brake (Pteridium aquilinum var. decompositum), a cosmopolitan, stiff, weedy fern, with creeping underground stems and long-stemmed, triangular fronds 60 or more cm long, much divided. Also kīlau pueo, paiʻā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti stalk with shredded leaves, as held by a fishing director (kilo iʻa) and used to guide the fishing canoes; ti stalk used to flip water of purification.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small but conspicuous hill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīleo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft palate including uvula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīleo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trigger of a gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīleo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ring of ʻie, a vine, sewed to the top of a fish basket to hold fish in place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlepalepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>streamer, banner, tassel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlepalepa kō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar-cane tassel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to float in the wind, to flutter, flap, flip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irregular, uneven, of varying lengths.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlepa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rooster comb, wattle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put away for safekeeping, as bundles on a shelf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hook; to catch with a hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīlua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do with determination.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīmanamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>branching in various directions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīmopō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night assassination, secret rebellion or coup; to waylay in the dark; to assassinate. fig., of any underhanded act.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīmoʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neat bundles of stripped pandanus leaves ready for plaiting; to lay strips together and tie in long bundles, as of pandanus leaves or mulberry bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīmō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to pound, 
   • bruise, 
   • mash, as with stick or stone; 
   • to smash, break into bits; 
   • to dub out the inside of a canoe log with an adze, tamping and smoothing the surface; 
   • to crack, as nuts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīmōmō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pound at a fast, steady rate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• mother hen or bird and her brood; 
   • a brooding place, chicken house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnana hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>home, including the house grounds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnaʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stain, blemish, defect, minor flaw or imperfection, mistake, blunder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnaʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an eel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnaʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of aku and kawakawa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decorated, spotted, ornamented; decoration, ornamentation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnohinohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>printed, as calico. see ex., hoʻopukalia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīnā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• blemish, blotch, flaw, 
   • disfigurement or physical defect of any sort; 
   • disfigured, blemished, malformed, handicapped, imperfect, maimed; 
   • to mar, mutilate.
   • blight; loss of crops due to any natural disaster, as drought, excessive rain, insects; 
   • sin, wickedness;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīoeoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long, tall, as a ship mast or giraffe neck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small surfboard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn the head with a rotary motion, as of a bird watching its prey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīolaola hao lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horseshoe pitching; to pitch horseshoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīolaola lina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ringtoss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīolaola₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of kiola, to throw, toss.
   • tossing back and forth or up and down, as in juggling; 
   • to cast for fish; 
   • to sort and distribute, as sweet potato cuttings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīolaola₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a form of black magic, by which a special stone was prayed over and hurled at a victim; it entered through the anus or mouth and destroyed the victim, and then returned to the magician.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpaepae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone pavement or steps for entering a house. fig. transition, ceremony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpahulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where soil is worn out (pahulu) from constant farming; worn-out soil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpaipai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to encourage, inspire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpalaheʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smeared, stained.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpalalē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• disorder, jumble, tumult; disorderly, unsystematic, without method; 
   • rapid flow, as of a swollen stream; 
   • to spread, extend in a disorderly fashion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpaopao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scoop out the earth from the side, as by the sea hammering on a coast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• pavement, level terrace; 
   • to pave, lay stones in pavement or terrace; 
   • to wall in, as with stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be close together, as clouds, or as taro neatly packed in a load; to shoot together (see papa₃).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpapa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpapa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prone position on a surfboard; to assume such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overturn completely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to shoo away, as by clapping (paʻi); 
   • to drive away animals; 
   • to pat with the hands; 
   • to strike with the wings, as an angry bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cover or spread leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pelt, throw at. fig., to assail with rough language, speak harshly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cross sticks, as in building a temporary shelter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpohopoho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small arable patch surrounded by lava beds, smaller than a kīpuka.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpoho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• small, shallow pool, basin, or hollow in a rock, as where salt water collects; 
   • small container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpoho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dive, dip or pitch downward, as a kite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wrapper, such as ti leaves about fish; to wrap up, bundle up; to keep warm with wraps, as a sick person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpolipoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nook and cranny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of prayer used in black magic requesting that the victim be led to a place of death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīponapona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small, climbing, native shrub (Phyllostegia racemosa) in the mint family, with small, downy leaves, and small, purplish-white flowers in whorls.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drive down, as a stake into the ground; to go downward; descend; to lean, as a post.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cover, conceal, hide; 
   • to protest giving away objects to others.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpoʻipoʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet potato patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpoʻohiwi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpoʻopoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indented, pitted with holes; pits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpuka ʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leather lasso.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpuka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variation or change of form (puka, hole), as 
   • a calm place in a high sea, 
   • deep place in a shoal, 
   • opening in a forest, 
   • openings in cloud formations, 
and especially 
   • a clear place or oasis within a lava bed where there may be vegetation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpuka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short shoulder cape; cloak, poncho.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpuka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loop, lasso; snare, as for catching owls (a rat was tied to a sharp stick in a net; the owl, pouncing on the rat, was pierced by this stick).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fertilizer, mulch; to fertilize, mulch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpuni₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gird, wrap around, surround.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpupū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hinder, draw back; 
   • to jerk and start, as an automobile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Chinese gambling game chee-fah; to play this game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpāpali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cliff brink, small cliffs; hilly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bribe, bribery (Ioba 15.34) ; to bribe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pelt with stones; to strike, as hail stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpē₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large ti-leaf bundle tied at one end.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpōʻaeʻae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armpit (pōʻaeʻae) and shoulder above it.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>depot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpū lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• immobile, motionless in the sky, as clouds, stars; 
   • steadfast and loyal to one's chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpūkai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seaside heliotrope (Heliotropium curassavicum), a prostrate, perennial American herb 30 to 60 cm long, with narrow, hoary leaves, white or pale purple flowers, considered indigenous to Hawaiʻi. Formerly the plants were dried and brewed for tea used as a tonic. Also nena and poʻopoʻohina or lau poʻopoʻohina on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hold back or brace, as a canoe on a wave with a paddle; 
   • to rein in, as a horse; 
   • to remain, as mist or rain; 
   • to fold tightly about one, as a blanket; 
   • steersman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīpū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tranquillity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwawā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unintelligible sound of voices.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwawā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mulberry bark partly beaten into tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwaʻawaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full of ruts and furrows, rough, rutty, uneven; broad-shouldered, muscular, as a strong man (so called because the muscular furrows suggest canoes, waʻa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwaʻawaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of coarse, rough tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a mythical bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dredge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwaʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick formerly used as a vise to hold the canoe while attaching the gunwale strakes (moʻo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>civil, civic; civilian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīwini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brazen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻaha inu waina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wineglass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻaha kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>teacup.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻaha puaniki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goblet. lit., holding cup.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻaha ʻoʻoma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pitcher (pika is now in common use), vase. lit., concave tumbler.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻahaʻaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pour liquid out of a cup or container (ninini is now in common use).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cord or rope, as for hoisting a flag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dig out, as the eyes, to scoop out; to reach out with a scooping movement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plug, stopper; sanitary napkin or napkin of any sort; any nozzle inserted in the rectum (ʻamo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti leaf folded into a cup and used for dipping water; the two hands rounded to form a cup for drinking water; to cup the hand; to catch with cupped hands, as tiny fish; ladle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bag, satchel; basket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻililī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to squat on haunches; to perch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻililī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trill, of a bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻohuʻohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mist; misty; misty place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>striped; creased with fat; stripes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>key to animate a toy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lame; to limp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻope₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bundle;. to make a bundle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻope₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter a fire in order to put it out.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻope₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish resembling kawakawa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• ladle, dipper, cup; scoop or spoon made of coconut shell; 
   • dip, as of poi; 
   • to skim, as cream from milk; 
   • to dip, ladle, scoop;
   •  arm or wrist motion in paddling or dipping;  
   • net-mending instrument; to join nets together; 
   • to twist and snap, as breadfruit with a lou stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻoʻe poi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>finger or single dip of poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻōnaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bent, crooked, curved.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kīʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>latch on sewing machine to which the bobbin is attached.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti, a woody plant (Cordyline terminalis) in the lily family, native to tropical Asia and Australia. It consists of a branched or unbranched, slender, ringed stem, ending in a cluster of narrow-oblong, leaves 30 to 60 cm long, from among which at times rises a large panicle of small, light-colored flowers. The leaves were put to many uses by the Hawaiians, as for house thatch, food wrappers, hula skirts, sandals; the thick, sweet roots were baked for food or distilled for brandy. (Neal 203–4) Besides green-leaved tis, which rarely fruit, many ornamental varieties are grown in gardens, having leaves wide to narrow, large to small, the colors purple, crimson, scarlet, rust, pink, or green, striped or plain. Red tis may have red flowers and berries. Green ti leaves are still believed to afford protection from spirits and to purify a menstruating woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Spanish needle (Bidens pilosa), a weed from tropical America, a kind of daisy with simple or compound leaves, small yellow flower heads, and narrow black bristle-tipped fruits. Also kī nehe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to shoot or aim, as with a gun; 
   • to squirt water, as with a syringe; 
   • to blow from the mouth, as a fisherman spitting chewed kukui nut on the sea to quiet it; 
   • to spit, as an angry cat; 
   • to travel fast, jet, hurry, especially on horseback (Kauaʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle of 40 pandanus leaves, sorted for size and length and set aside for plaiting; to sort leaves for such a bundle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trigger of a gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kī₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kōkiawailau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kōkua Hou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Counselor (RSV), Comforter (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kōmomona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Kahauiki, Honolulu. lit., sweat sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kōwā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō Kina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of sugar cane, 1857. lit., Chinese cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō Pākē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, probably imported by the Chinese.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō i kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go behind one's back, to do in a person's absence what one would not do in his presence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ia ala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>his, hers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō iwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>your own interests, your own
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō kula kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lowland dweller; belonging to the lowlands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō kākou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>our, ours (o-form, plural, inclusive).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō kānāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>law enforcement; to enforce the law.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō kāua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>our, ours (o-form, dual, inclusive).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō laila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>those of that place; local.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō pua ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of flowerless sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>line used for towing a canoe, especially for dragging canoe hulls from the forest where they were hollowed out to the shore; to tow or drag a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ā kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shore dweller; belonging to the shore or sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ā uka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upland dweller, belonging to the uplands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ʻaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar cane (so called to distinguish from kōpaʻa and kōomoomo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ʻaneʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the local, as kō ʻaneʻi poʻe, the local people (o-class; cf. kā ʻaneʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>accomplished, come to pass, come true, as a prophecy. lit., truly accomplished.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ʻolua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>your, yours (o-, dual).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō ʻoukou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>your, yours (o-, plural).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōaheahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blowing gently, as the wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōaniani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to waft, as a soft cooling breeze; to make a breeze with a fan; cooled by a breeze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōanoano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark, gloomy, fearful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōekōe aku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>go away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōelepālau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pudding made by peeling and mashing cooked sweet potatoes, then adding coconut cream gradually. Also pālau, poi pālau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>desolate, destitute, uninhabited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhanahana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warm, hot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōheoheo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fall, as through the air; to tumble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōheoheo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poisonous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōheoheo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coattail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōheoheo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick or buoy that floats a fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōheoheo₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nose flute (hano is more common).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōheo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to show off, parade, strut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to train or practice, as for foot races.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhi ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to separate taro corm from stalk; to pick taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhikōhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cull, separate, grade, as fish or sweet potatoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhikōhikūpalalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>children's guessing game, with an object hidden in the earth or sand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>part of taro where the corm is cut away from the top; splitting of a breadfruit for cooking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gather, as fruit; 
   • to break off neatly, as taro corm from the stalk with a stick or knife; 
   • to split, as breadfruit; 
   • splitter, as stick, stone, knife.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fat, rich, as food; fatness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fill or heal, of a wound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hold back, check, restrain: 
   • to strain, especially as in childbirth, to travail; 
   • to hold or hold back by pressing a person's arm, as in withholding consent, or as in urging someone not to be generous; 
   • labor pains, 
   • travail. 
   fig., agony, fear. Also haʻakōhi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prolonged, as a sound; long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dig (For. 4:510).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōhoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an infection, probably luetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• urging, insistence; 
   • fine (as punishment). 
   • fig., firm attachment, as to a beloved child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• thorns on the edge of a pandanus or pineapple leaf; 
   • spines on a dorsal fin. 
   • Maka kōkala: thorny eyes, said (sometimes jestingly), (For. 5:83) of the Puna people, who concealed the placenta of a newborn child in a pandanus tree, believing that the child's eyelashes would then grow long as the pandanus thorns, giving the child a bright, keen look.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>porcupine fish (Diodon hystrix, Diodon holocanthus, Cheilomycterus affinis); both spines and flesh are regarded as poisonous; in some localities an ʻaumakua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lean, of meat; dry, barren.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkeano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>silent, deserted, uninhabited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wind, bend.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkikiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>away up high. fig., ambitious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkoia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beating, as the heart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkolikoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark, burned, of a kukui nut candle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>partnership, partner, associate, companion (nearly always followed by a number designating the number of associated persons, as kōkoʻolua, kōkoʻokolu. (See koʻo-)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkoʻohia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>how many? (Of associated persons.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkoʻohā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>companionship, partnership, association of four persons; one of four associates.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkoʻokolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>partnership of three, one of three associates.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkoʻolua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>companion, partner, associate, fellow worker, mate, partnership, second (in a dual), union (always of two).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkua Hou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>new help; to help again.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkua kauka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>doctor's aide, intern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkua kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>assistant teacher, substitute teacher.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkua luna kānāwai kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>associate or deputy judge of the supreme court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkua makamua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second team (horse or oxen following the lead team).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkuahaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adverb. lit., aid in speaking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lash back and forth, as the tail of an animal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gag, stuff the mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike, hit, punish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkēkōkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the noise of hitting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkīkī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sagging, bending; place where a branch divides off.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extremity, tiptop, topmost; upper limit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to don a helmet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>meaningless syllables occurring in chants...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō puʻupuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very fine kōkō net for a calabash carried by kahu of high rank with chief's food. lit., knotted net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō pūʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>netted bag made of sennit with large plain mesh. lit., loose net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>network of red color, as of a spreading rainbow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkōliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thick black cloud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkōwaikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pith of banana stalk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a carrying net, usually made of sennit, as used for hanging calabashes; 
   • a string hammock, as formerly used for carrying the very old.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tie up strings, as of a calabash; 
   • lacings, as of sharkskin to a drum body.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pull, jerk, drag, push, massage; to set a bone by applying pressure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pregnancy; pregnant, heavy with child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōkō₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cocoa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sitting hula in honor of a chief (lani).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlea lau liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native small tree or shrub with small leaves (Myrsine sandwicensis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlea lau nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native tree (Myrsine lessertiana) in the rain forests, with narrow to wide, large leathery leaves clustered at branch tips, bearing many small round red or black fruits usually just below the leaves. Wood is not very hard, but was formerly used for house posts and beams.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlealea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to play with a child, as bobbing it up and down on one's leg and singing ditties with the refrain kōlealea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• Pacific golden plover (Pluvialis dominica), a migratory bird which comes to Hawaiʻi about the end of August and leaves early in May for Siberia and Alaska. 
   • fig., to repeat, boast; a scornful reference to foreigners (Kel. 70) who come to Hawaii and become prosperous, and then leave with their wealth, just as the plover arrives thin in the fall each year, fattens up, and leaves; 
   • a less common figurative reference is to one who claims friendship or kinship that does not exist; 
   • in some localities the kōlea is an ʻaumakua; 
   • to call kōlea. cf. hula kōlea and saying, kauhua₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stepparent, as makuahine kōlea, makua kāne kōlea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the mottled periwinkle, probably Littorina pintado.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlea₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native species of trees and shrubs (Myrsine [Rapanea, Suttonia]) with oval to narrow leaves more or less crowded at branch tips, small flowers, and small round fruits among or below the leaves. Uses: red sap and charcoal from the wood to dye tapa, wood for houses, logs for beating tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlikoliko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swollen, enlarged, fat, greasy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlikoliko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young wauke, bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlilelile</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glisten, sparkle, glitter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōliʻuliʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dim, obscure, indistinct, as a distant object or sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long cane with a crook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a prolonged sound, roar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōluilui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>continued ringing sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to defend, shield, ward off.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlīlili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to vibrate, as heat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlīliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dwindling, diminishing, as of water in a stream or pool, or of something in the distance, or of pain; convalescing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlīlā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, bony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōlū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter; to drop, as bombs; bombing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>committee, committee member.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmike hui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joint committee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmike komo ʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>visiting committee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmike ola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>welfare committee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmike wae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>select committee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to press, bear down, rub, as in massage; to pull taut, as a fishline.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prepared poi not yet mixed with water, softer than paʻi ʻai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōmōmo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>candy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnalelewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variety of ʻaʻawa, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quiet, tranquil, peaceful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnane hoʻopaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa-beater design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnane pepehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa-beater design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnane pūpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tapa-beater pattern; a kōnane checkerboard design with rounded pits (pūpū) in the middle of each square.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnane₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright moonlight; to shine, as the moon; clear, bright.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnane₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient game resembling checkers, played with pebbles placed in even lines on a stone or wood board called papa kōnane; to play kōnane. cf. nane, riddle; mū, papamū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnane₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa-beater design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>restored to health.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōniuniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizzy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stricken with great heat, as by the sun's rays.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōnunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rounded and well shaped, as a lehua flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōomoomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>candy. lit., sucking cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpaʻa hoʻokeʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>refined sugar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpaʻa hōʻae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>powdered sugar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpaʻa mānoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coarse sugar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpaʻa puʻupuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lump sugar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpaʻa ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brown sugar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpiko kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of kōpiko (Psychotria [Straussia] kaduana) with short-stemmed, rather oblong leaves, small flowers in long drooping clusters, and with small fruits. The wood is orange.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpiko ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of kōpiko (Psychotria [Straussia] hawaiiensis) with large leaves to about 18 by 9 cm, on stems 2.5 cm long, with midrib reddish below; the flowers covered with reddish down.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpiko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>about 13 native species of trees belonging to the genus Psychotria, a member of the coffee family. Leaves are thick, leathery, blunt or pointed; flowers small, white, clustered at the ends of long stems at branch tips. Called ʻōpiko on Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpiko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>torpedo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, transparent tapa made of mulberry bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small white tapa placed over images and altars during religious services; the ceremony; to perform the ceremony. Also kōpilo nui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>birthday gift to a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōpī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to sprinkle, as salt, sand; 
   • to salt, as fish or meat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōwehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to billow or flutter out, as a dancer's skirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōwelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stream, flutter, wave; 
   • to trail behind, as the train of a gown.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōwelokā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trail or drag, as a dress train.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōwā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• intervening space or time;
   • channel, canal, strait, 
   • gulch; 
   • separated, as by a passage or channel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōwē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. spelling of kōwā₁, intervening space or time; channel, canal, strait, gulch; separated, as by a passage or channel...; crack or space, as between fence boards.  cf. ʻoā, split, cracked, burst...   [He wahi ma waena o ʻelua mea. Ke kai ma waena o ʻelua moku.]₁₄,₁₇
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp, shrill, as a voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flow with force, as water over a dam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to string, as flowers for a lei  or candlenuts on a coconut leaf midrib for a light; such a string.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōī₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sliding game; child's game with sticks dug into earth or sand while repeating a jingle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōī₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small tree (Coprosma kauensis), a native of Kauaʻi, related to the pilo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look about in all directions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stir with a circular motion of the hand; 
   • to wind around, creep around, as a vine; 
   • to gird around, as a pāʻū sarong; 
   • to brace with a paddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻalaʻala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probable redup. of koʻana₁, with n changed to l; food scraps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻalaʻala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quickly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to broil or barbecue (of meat, fowl, fish). cf. kunu, pūlehu, and ʻala₁, fragrant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fast, quickly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻehaʻeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heat, sultriness; sultry, uncomfortably hot. fig., physical or mental distress or discomfort; distressed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻeleʻele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, edible red seaweeds (Gymogongrus spp.), with rather thick, flattened stems and branches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small land unit farmed by a tenant for the chief; to be worked as a kōʻele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Friday, so called because commoners worked on the chief's farm, called kōʻele, on this day. Any work for a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any variety of large, tough ʻopihi (the shells were used as scrapers and peelers).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻele₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small pond, reserved for a chief, where fish could be kept alive until required.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻele₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>less desirable portions of meat or fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻieʻie₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plaything, toy, used in water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻieʻie₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rapid current or what it carries; to rush, as water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻiuʻiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distant, faraway, so high as to be barely visible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kōʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arid, barren, rocky and unfruitful; dry or tasteless, as overdone meat. fig., rude, nasty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar cane (Saccharum officinarum), a large unbranched grass brought to Hawaiʻi by early Polynesians as a source of sugar and fiber. The thick stems are full of sweet juicy pulp. In time, many different kinds of cane were produced, with many different attributes and names. Cane yields one of the most valuable plant products known. For commercial purposes the yield has been increased by hybridizing with such success that the sugar industry was for many years the largest industry in Hawaiʻi.  (For. 5:582–9) lists types of kō, all are listed in the Dictionary except kō malolo (also known as kō puhala and kō ʻailolo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dragged, towed, to drag, tow, push, pull, tug, 
   • wind-borne; 
   • long, as a vowel sound; prolong, drawl; 
   • to hold a note for several beats in singing or chanting; 
   • massage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to fulfill, come to pass, succeed, do, complete, foreclose; fulfilled.
   • to win in dispute; 
   • to become pregnant;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break up lumps in poi by pressing against the side of a container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second note in musical scale, re.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>and interj. A call to pigs, fowl. Also kolo, kolo, kolo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of (o-form possessive). Note idiomatic use with ā, as far as, plus a direction word: kō ā uka, those of the uplands; kō ā mua, those in the foreground; kō ā hope, those behind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kō₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>your (of one person; singular possessed object; replacing both kāu and kou, often with affectionate connotation).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kū Kahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the third day in the lunar month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kū Kanaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pray to the god Kanaloa, as on the Kāloa days of the month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kū Kolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the fifth day in the lunar month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kū Lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fourth day of the old lunar month; also, the name of the 17th day and second after the full moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kū Pau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the sixth day of the lunar month, and last of the four taboo days of Kū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of the last great chiefs, a descendent of Līloa's wife Pineʻa, said to have subjugated first his own Oʻahu, and then the remainder of the Hawaiian Islands. He was succeeded by his son Peleiōhōlani (Pele at Hōlani [a mythical realm] ). (Kam) says he died in 1730 at the age of 175 (For. 4:432). In a 610-line chant he is praised as a mortal (kanaka), a god (akua), one who flies from heaven (ulele mai ka lani), and a foreigner (haole) from Tahiti (For. 4:394-395).  lit., royal Kū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūkalahale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a rain and wind famous at Honolulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūkauakahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>said to be an old name for the gods Kāne, Kū, and Lono. The theory of a trinity is believed due to remaking of Hawaiian legends by Kepelino, Kamakau, and Fornander to conform to the Bible. see Barrère-1969.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūkoaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a god appealed to in ʻanāʻanā, evil sorcery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūkulu o Kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pillars of Kahiki; it was believed that the sky was supported by a vertical wall along the horizon; the section of the wall over Kahiki (formerly Tahiti) was the Kūkulu o Kahiki.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūkāʻilimoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kamehameha's war image.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūlanihākoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mythical pond or lake in the sky; its overflow comes to the earth as rain. lit., like heaven agitated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūlōlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind at Hāmākua, Maui. (Probably a contraction of kū kololio, gusty state.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūmakua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a strong wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūmau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>North Star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūmokuhāliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a god of forests and canoe makers; his wife was Lea. lit., Kū island spreader.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūpoʻilaniua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., stands the rainy sky cover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūpuku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a constellation of a cluster of seven stars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūpāʻaikeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>god of canoe makers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūʻiakānakaheleokapō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting. lit., people traveling at night are hindered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kūʻīlioloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a giant man-dog. He was killed by Kamapuaʻa (pig man), who stuffed his own weed bodies down the dog's throat and cut his way out (HM 202). The hero Kaulu tore him apart; therefore dogs are small today (HM 348). A girl fled down his throat and his tail was cut off; hence dogs have short tails (HM 500). lit., Kū long dog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kū₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth days of the month, usually called respectively Kū Kahi, Kū Lua, Kū Kolu, Kū Pau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Kū₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient Hawaiian god of war. Prayers connected with this major god include Kūkoliʻi, Kūlawa, Kūlewalewa, Kūpapaʻa, Kūwā, Kūwī... 
In some accounts, Kū and Hina were the first gods to reach Hawaii, and were followed next by Kāne and Kanaloa, and last by Lono (HM 11). Kū (upright) represented male generating power, and Hina (prostrate) was the expression of female fecundity and the power of growth. Kū also refers to the rising sun, and Hina to the setting sun; hence their realm includes the whole earth and the heavens and all generations of man born and unborn. (HM 12-13). Many fictional characters are named Kū and Hina, with implication of high birth, and most of the few references to infanticide in the stories refer to Kū and Hina, possibly indicating that it occurred rarely and that the motive was racial purity. Dozens of epithets are associated with Kū. Various forms of Kū were appealed to for rain and growth, fishing, and sorcery, but he is best known as a god of war. When gathering medicine with their right hands, people prayed to Kū for success. The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth nights of the lunar month were sacred to Kū. He sometimes assumed the form of the ʻō-hiʻa tree or the ʻio hawk. lit., upright.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to get up and go.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise again, recover from illness, resurrect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū ihoiho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>candlestick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū kahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>standing alone, outstanding, unique, first.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū kaʻawale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand apart, be entirely different, independent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soak in brine, as meat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū pona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand a bond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū uaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand a watch; watchman, sentinel, guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū ā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn into; to be similar to. (In some constructions this sequence is followed by particles or qualifiers and may be considered a verb compound; note kūākanaka and kūāmaʻi in (Gram. 8.7.2))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū ā makalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>having abundant offspring. lit., generation of many faces.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū ākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand openly or in public; to take a public stand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū … kā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>used only in the idiom ʻo kū! ʻo kā! This originated in Wahineʻōmaʻo's chant: ʻO kū, ʻo kā ʻo Wahineʻōmaʻo, wahine a Lohiʻau ipo (PH 184), bam! boom! Woman-in-green, wife of Sweetheart-Lohiʻau. Wahineʻōmaʻo did not know how to dance or chant; her song was merely a rhythm beat to which she marched about comically. Hence the idiom has come to mean 'a lick and a promise, do it as quickly as possible and get it over with.'
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>qualitative and stative prefix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūakalikea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of cloth with white on its edges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūakalikea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whorish [especially of Hawaiian women having love affairs with white men]. lit., becoming white vagina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūakā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boom, boom!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūaluʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red cords used to decorate a chief's canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūamuamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to revile, blaspheme, curse, swear, damn, insult; to chant a curse or reviling song.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūanoano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>highly respected. (Malo text, chapter 16, section 15).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūauʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>according to Emerson (UL 95), same as lūauʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fern (Asplenium kaulfussii) with oblong fronds about 60 cm. long, with twelve or more pairs of narrow, pointed pinnae.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sea creature (perhaps Aplysia sp.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūaʻai hoʻ olilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of high position, as one possessed by the gods. lit., stand perch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhalahala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to find fault with, criticize; dissatisfied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhalakau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aerial tubers of uhi, yam, hoi, and related plants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhaluka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many, numerous, as of a crowd; crowded, huddled together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>each of two gable posts in the old Hawaiian house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhana ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, indolent, do-nothing. lit., condition of doing nothing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mat motif consisting of red bands internally enhanced with a continuous row of white lozenges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resembling partially; of varying or unmatched size or appearance. lit., partly fit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, tottering, feeble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhaʻaliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to brag, boast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>standing alone, independent. fig., unusual, extraordinary, as rain from a clear sky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to harangue, talk on and on urging a point but not saying much,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhea manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bird imitator; fowler.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhelahela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, feeble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhela₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an unbroken swell of the sea, drifting in without breaking; to sweep along as the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhela₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>game played with sharp ʻūlei sticks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhelemai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a gambling game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sudden attack, 
   • stroke, as of heart failure; 
   • apoplexy; 
   • sudden wind gust; 
   • suddenly attacked by a stroke; 
   • hit without warning or in error; 
   • to strike.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to censure, condemn, especially of innocent persons; to involve, entangle, embroil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stain or dye by soaking in water containing mashed bark, as nets or mulberry bark before it is pounded into tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blunder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wander about aimlessly; senseless digression.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greasy, oily, polished; to rub with oil, polish, grease; a name applied to women (except kāhuna) because they were not permitted to make offerings to the gods with their hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhipahipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mutter indistinctly; unintelligible gibberish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>special taboo made by a chief; to be subject to this taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quartermaster of ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an edible spotted-back crab (Portunus sanguinolentus). lit., turtle back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhonua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suddenly struck, as by disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhou poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dive headfirst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhulukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goose flesh, as from chill; quaking, as during an earthquake; agitated, disturbed. see prayer, kualakai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhākakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swollen, fat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūhōhō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep ravine; deep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūikawā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• temporary, for the time being, transient, 
   • ad hoc, makeshift, 
   • occasional, 
   • provisional, acting
   • special; 
   • free and independent, not bound to a chief in opinion or course. 
    lit., standing at the time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkae manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bird dung, guano.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkae pōpolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excreta after eating pōpolo greens, a term for a chief whose mother was said to be a commoner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkae ʻuaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excreta and scent of ʻuaʻu birds, as left in their holes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a brownish substance, sometimes noticed under trees in the shape of paste squeezed from a tube; if the substance contains red, it is believed to be the excreta of the ghost of a dying person, and a sign that someone is dying. lit., ghost excrement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaehao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rust; rusty. lit., iron excrement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaehipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spiny bur (Acanthospermum australe), a branching, prostrate tropical American weed, 10 to 60 cm long, bearing small star-shaped bristly fruits. lit., sheep dung. Also called ʻihi kūkae hipa, pipili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaehoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rattlepod (Crotalaria incana), an erect tropical American weed, about 94 cm high, with three-parted leaves, yellow flowers, and hairy, dark-brown pods, each pod 2.5 cm or more long and containing 20 or more seeds. lit., mule dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaekoloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaelio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toadstool, mushroom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaelio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name for unidentified wild grasses growing where horses are pastured. lit., horse dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mildew; mildewed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaelā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eggs deposited by flies, as in meat. lit., sun excrement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaemoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small tree (Pelea clusiaefolia subsp. sapotaefolia [synonym, P. microcarpa]) that grows at high altitudes on Kauaʻi. lit., chicken dung, named for the appearance of the seed capsules. Also alani kuahiwi, all species of Pelea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaenalo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mole on the body, believed to be deposits of flies during infancy. lit., fly dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaenalo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beeswax.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaenalo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unbleached muslin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaenēnē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., goose dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaepaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>constipation. lit., hard excreta.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaepele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sulphur, brimstone, match. lit., Pele's dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaepuaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weedy, creeping grass (Digitaria pruriens), native to Hawaiʻi; some introduced species of Digitaria are also sometimes called kūkaepuaʻa, as D. sanguinalis and D. adscendens (syn. D. henryi); a plant form of the pig demigod Kamapuaʻa. lit., pig dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaepuaʻa uka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crab grass (Digitaria violascens) 30 to 60 cm tall, forming clumps. lit., upland kūkaepuaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaepueo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaepueo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ink squirted by octopus to discolor water. fig., prostitute, as in whalers' days, so called because of their alleged cleverness at escaping from precarious situations. lit., black excreta.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeʻiole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small hard spots on an umbilical cord, the number of spots indicating the number of children the mother is to bear. lit., rat's dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeʻiole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taro found growing in inaccessible spots, as a tree crotch, believed carried there by rats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeʻiole₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insignificant trifles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeʻiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a form of gourd having fruit green with white splotches, still grown on Molokaʻi and East Maui. lit., dung of ʻiwabird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaeʻuaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a medicinal plant (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand sideways, as in making room for another to pass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkahalakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scolding, raving and ranting in a fit of temper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkahekahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to while the time away in pleasant conversation, jesting, laughing, and telling anecdotes; pleasant conversation, chatting. lit., stand flowing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dipped frequently in the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaikea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faded, as cloth. fig., boring, dull, uninteresting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to kaka₁, translated 'purified' by Emerson. cf. (Malo text, Chapter 26, section 36).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glib hanger-on, parasite; one who lives with others, depending on glibness of tongue; to be glib.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to proclaim publicly, tell abroad, announce; herald.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkala hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>false alarm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boasting; to boast. (See liki₁)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkanawao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for weeds. lit., resembling the kanawao, wild taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkanono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excessive, more than usual.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkapihe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lamentation. lit., the wail arises.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkapihe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a strong purge made from bark of the shrub called koko and sap of the green kukui nut; it was administered only as a last resort and often resulted in death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chastity; chaste; taboo-surrounded and unapproachable; in a state of taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep-water fishing with hook and line; fishing grounds at about 80 fathoms depth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaulani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>with great care, with esteem, in chiefly fashion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkawowo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to care for young plants or seedlings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkawowo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread, reach a goal (of a sorcerer's prayer).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkawowo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rush or gurgle, as water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>convoy, guard; safe, protected, convoyed; to place in custody for protection; to convoy, guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• roll, bolt of cloth; rolled pack, as of pandanus leaves ready for plaiting; 
   • to roll up, as a bundle of cloth or tapa; 
   • to swell up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wholesale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻi leka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to correspond back and forth; to exchange letters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻi makani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to attempt to induce the spirit possessing a person to talk through the person and reveal the reason for the possession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻi ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to converse, narrate; recount.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exchange, as greeting (aloha), conversation (kamaʻilio), letters (leka). (kū₁ + -kaʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand guard as soldiers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkaʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rope fastening fish nets together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>muddy, slippery; to slip, slide, as in mud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sail, as a boat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>firm, steady, steadfast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkilakila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>majestic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkinikini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grouped together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>runner, swift messenger, as employed by old chiefs, with a premium on their speed; to run swiftly, as of a messenger; to race.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>close together, in great numbers, as plants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkini₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cushion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small pool of water. lit., standing pool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkoaʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temple for purification ceremonies (Malo 151–2, Emerson note 156), for prayers for food (Malo 188).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unfriendly, cross, sullen. cf. konā, haughty; mākonā, malevolent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkonukonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excessive, overmuch, deep, profound, serious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu kumuhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pool thoughts and prayers to solving common problems, as during hoʻoponopono (Nānā 78–80); to set up topics for discussion, as an agenda.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu o ka honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>region just below the horizon where sea and sky meet. lit., pillars (or borders) of the earth. cf. (Isa. 45.22) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu o ka lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>region just above the horizon where sea and sky meet. lit., pillars (or borders) of the sky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pile in regular order; to arrange, classify, as plants, words. Less used than hoʻonoho papa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• pillar, post, 
   • side, border, edge, 
   • horizon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tie, tether (so called because formerly horses were tied to erected [kūkulu] stakes); 
   • to park.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sit with one knee raised high towards the chin, considered bad form for women.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkulu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• type of battle in which opposing forces were formally drawn, up in line against each other; 
   • front, as in modern warfare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>consultation, discussion; to consult, confer, discuss, deliberate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkā kamaʻilio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interview, conference; to hold such, negotiate. lit., confer chat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkā moʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to study or consult genealogy. lit., confer lineage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkā moʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to use enchantment. lit., consult moʻo spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkākaʻikahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>standing wide apart; scattered widely, as houses.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkākūkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to discuss, negotiate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>auction; to sell at auction. lit., stand dollar (Eng.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkīhelei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to straddle, stand with legs far apart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkū kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grandpa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkū wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grandma.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkūau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large grapsid crab (Metopograpsus thukuhar).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkūohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp, steep, conspicuous, as house roof.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkūʻēʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of kūʻē and kūʻēʻē.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to shake in jerks, 
   • bounce, 
   • trot, as on a horse; 
   • bumpy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gourd beat; the gourd is thumped down on a pad three times, and on the third rise, it is slapped; to beat thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūkū₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea gull (RSV), cuckoo (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>station, rank, title, condition, position, place, quality, grade, rating, reputation (see ex., kuene), stance, attitude, poise, carriage, posture, situation, patch, site; outstanding, prominent (kū, stand, + -lana, nominalizer).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlana kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably the same as kūlana nalu, place where the waves swell up and the surf rider starts paddling...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlana nalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where the waves swell up and the surf rider starts paddling and racing the wave, usually at the most distant line of breakers. Also kūlana heʻenalu (Laie 453 [70]).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlana paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>standard, as weight or money.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlana pilikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jeopardy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlana pule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer meeting or other religious service.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlana waewae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fussy, fastidious, choosy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlanahale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house site.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlanalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsteady, tottering, unsettled, wavering, wobbly, undecided, uncertain, fluctuating.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of chiefly nature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>earth piled on the sides of a ditch, as of a plowed furrow or as on the edge of a taro patch; to dig or plow and cast up earth or furrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to frolic, jump, or skip about in sport; 
   • to struggle, twist, turn, writhe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scatter as does the wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlepe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• split open from head to tail, as fish prepared for drying and salting; to slit thus; 
   • to hew out roughly, as a canoe; 
   • to make a hole or dig out.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlepe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to flap, flutter; 
   • strong, of wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlepe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>harelip. (Less common than ʻūlepe.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>moving slowly through space, as clouds; swaying, dangling, hanging. fig., far away in space, as the ocean beyond sight of land or as its profound depths.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>successful, competent; happily.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand, halt, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to try, strive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlia₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outstanding, fortunate, lucky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grazed, as by a bullet; hit but not seriously hurt; hooked but escaped, as a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• alike, identical, 
   • conforming, 
   • resembling; 
   • standing in similar fashion or in even rows.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlikiliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corn, maize (Zea mays).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlina pohāpohā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>popcorn. (Zea mays).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlina wali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cornmeal. lit., fine corn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlina ʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet corn (Zea mays). lit., delicious corn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlipeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to creep along, as a sick person; to stumble awkwardly along; to walk as though weak-kneed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dark, dank, deep, as a cave. 
   • fig. extremely, intense, much
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūliʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to desire greatly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūliʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• deep, as a voice; 
   • penetrating, profound, as thoughts; 
   • late, remote, of the distant past.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the lengthy ceremonies on the night before graduation day in hula; a 'long waiting' with feasts and ceremonies lasting for hours; lengthy religious prayers, ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūloaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prosperous, well-supplied with needs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūloko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>local, domestic. lit., state of being inside.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūloku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>falling, flowing, as rain or stream; flattened, as plants by rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>helpless, inactive, due either to infirmity or laziness; sluggish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlolohili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long in doing a thing; to tell a story with many unnecessary details; garrulous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūloma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slow, dull, stupid, awkward, helpless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sheer, precipitous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leaky, as a calabash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlono₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insignificant, as an idea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bow the head, 
   • bend; 
   • to beckon with the head. 
Also kūnou.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlou poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bow the head; to dive headfirst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pairing off, as of mates; twins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plant propagated by slips or scions, formerly of pandanus aerial roots; to plant thus. lit., stand branch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seize, meddle in the concerns of others, oust, remove.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for kūloa, name of the lengthy ceremonies on the night before graduation day in hula...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlō pia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the long process of sweetening arrowroot starch (pia); to do this.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlōhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>languid, lounging about. lit. state of slowness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlōlia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of changed appearance, as of plants in different seasons (Kep. 89); grief-stricken, said to apply particularly to a mourner who wears a malo or pāʻū of the deceased about his neck as an expression of grief: he is breaking a taboo and has 'changed' (loli).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūlōʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wait a long time; to stand long; to last long, endure; to take a long time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmahakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to work in gardens; such work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• seen by the eye, seen, 
   • visible; 
   • eyewitness; 
   • associated with; 
   • to see for oneself.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmakahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>annual, yearly; yearly contract (see ex., lōpā₁).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmakani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>windbreak; wind-resisting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmakua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻāhihi₂, a lehua bush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmalolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reverential bowing during old prayers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water dam (rare), reservoir.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmanomano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bur grass (Cenchrus agrimonioides).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmanō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to catch sharks with bait and noose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, inactive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmaumau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as maumau; constant, continuous, together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>customary, usual, regular.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep wooden bowl with a thick base, as for poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shoemaker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blunt, flat, of the nose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmimi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small crabs such as Lophozozymus intonsus. Varieties are kūmimi mākaʻo (Petrolisthes coccineus) and kūmimi pua (Lybia tesselata). Both were used in sorcery and are inedible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmoana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large deep-sea crab (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bedstead. lit., standing bed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmoena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long strip commencement of a mat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmoena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pile of mats; spread out as a mat or landscape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise, overflow, as water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth, slippery, sheer, steep, rounded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lineage, as of chiefs or priests.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmā-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prefix to numbers as ʻumi kūmākahi, ʻumi kūmālua, iwakālua kūmākahi, kanakolu kūmālua, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmākena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lament, bewail, mourn loudly for the dead, grieve.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmīmī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frail, feeble, blighted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmūmū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dull, blunt, obtuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goatfish (Parupeneus porphyreus). The stages of growth are kolokolopā, ʻāhuluhulu, kūmū aʻe, and the adult kūmū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>good-looking, handsome, especially of a sweetheart. modern slang.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūmū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of red-stalked taro; varieties are qualified by the terms ʻeleʻele, kea, kū loa poni, ʻulaʻula, welo-welo lā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insecure, unsteady, as an infant or invalid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have a grudge, bear ill will. lit., standing intestines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand firmly against opposition; unyielding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to conquer, push over; conquest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ocean sunfish (Ranzania laevis, Mola mola, Masturus lanceolatus).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūneki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>filled to overflowing; to flow away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūneuneu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of loli, sea cucumber, perhaps a Stichopus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pass, of time; to age.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steep, sheer, precarious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• ridge, as of a precipice; 
   • ridge of a feather helmet; 
   • ridge of uncut hair on the head;
   • on edge; 
   • sideways; 
   • sheer; 
   • partly open, as a door.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to progress or move slowly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red, bright red; fiery (see ex., welo₃).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stubborn, willful, headstrong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnounou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of loli, sea cucumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnounou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. name for kūpoupou, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnāhelu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>moldy smelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnāhihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• weak, as from shock; 
   • numb, dazed, 
   • dismayed, shocked, horrified.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnānā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>puzzled, stumped, at wit's end, hesitating, undecided, bewildered; uncertain. lit., stand look.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnānā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūnānā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻānaunau and naunau, a plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alive and safe, as after escaping from danger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūolokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trilling song of a bird; to warble, trill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to saunter, trudge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>serious, dignified, sedate, earnest, stern, solemn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to brace oneself, as while being pushed; to hurl, as a spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to kick, 
   • thrash, as one in anger or as a child having a tantrum; 
   • to writhe, twist, struggle (Isa. 21.3) ; 
   • contorted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to recover, as from a nearly fatal illness, or as a dying plant (rare); resuscitation, as related in legends.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpalaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>designation for a koa tree with a thick, straight trunk, perhaps flat on one side or leaning close to the ground, good for a canoe hull.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpalaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temporary heiau temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpalaiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to quiet, soothe; soothing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpalaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>congested; blocked, as stagnant water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpalaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>too loose, large, as of a garment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic gourd (Sicyos pachycarpa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wild sweet potato or morning-glory with enlarged tuber, eaten in time of famine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>defense; to defend, ward off.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pole fish from a rock or cliff, to stand on a cliff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaloloi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to vibrate, as the ruffle of a drum; to trill; to drum with the fingers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stuff with food, fatten, hence to make a favorite; 
   • to attract fish by chumming, as with decayed pork; 
   • to mash to a pulp, sometimes said of tapa particles or cloth beaten into tapa as it is being prepared.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind-blown, as of clothes against the body.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong permeating fragrance, as of jasmine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>night cestrum (Cestrum nocturnum) and other strong-smelling plants; by some authorities Peperomia spp., Railliardia spp., and a plant used to scent tapa (see pele₃).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaoa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone from which octopus fishing sinkers were made.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpapakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bedrock; to stand on bedrock; depths of the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpapalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chief of the highest rank; state of heavenly foundation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpapaula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand facing the wind, as a house; exposed to the wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaukolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to reverberate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entirely finished.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fearful, shrinking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steadfast, firm, constant, immovable; loyal, faithful; determined; loyalty, allegiance, firmness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat poi or sweet potatoes with salt or relish such as ʻinamona, and without meat or greens; hence a place without fish or meat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>imperfect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heap, pile, stack, lot; to pile, stack, heap up, as in a disorderly fashion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to walk slowly, unsteadily, as of a sick person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pelt, throw at.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpeleleu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sprawling, occupying all the space so that others have no room; broad, as hips.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to knead, as bread dough or very hard fresh poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dub out the inside of a log for a canoe hull; to scoop out, as a trench; to dig and plow, as a taro patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>concoction of juices of herbs mixed with poi, tender taro leaves, coconut cream, mashed sweet potato, and other food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fatten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>camphire, camphor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>permanent, stationary; to reside long in one place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpenu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dip, to dye by dipping; 
   • to sop up; 
   • to dab as with a wet cloth; 
   • to plunge into water, immerse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpeʻe lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bracelet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpeʻe niho ʻīlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dog-tooth anklets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpeʻe pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bind feet of cattle, especially with the lasso.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpeʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bracelet, anklet; fetters, manacles, handcuffs; to put or tie on bracelets, anklets, fetters; to hogtie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpeʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an edible marine snail (Nerita polita); the shells were used for ornaments, the rare ones by chiefs. Varieties are qualified by the terms ānuenue, ʻeleʻele, kāniʻo, mahiole, palaoa (lit., ivory, (rare), puna (rare), ʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpihipihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny, small, insignificant; to become insignificant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cubit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpikiʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agitated, raging, turbulent, as wind or storm. fig., mentally disturbed. cf.
     pikipikiʻō rough, stormy, choppy, as the sea. fig., agitated in spirit...
     kūpikipikiʻō redup. of kūpikiʻō, agitated, raging, turbulent...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpilikiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• crowded, packed, 
   • distressed, severe; critical, as in a crisis; in dire trouble; difficulties.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>subpoena.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpinaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to echo, reverberate; 
   • to mourn, wail, lament.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpinaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crowd, throng; crowded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crowded, as people, stars, or pipipi shells.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpipipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to throng.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpoepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round; bundled up with clothes, as in cold weather.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plaiting process of turning a pandanus leaf back, thereby giving the product a neat edge; to plait thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to roll, wrap up, as a package; to wither and curl up, as a banana leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpololū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vaulting on a long pololū spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpolō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unresponsive, fatigued, exhausted, spiritless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpono ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsuitable, improper, disqualified, ill-fitting, inauspicious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpopou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpoukia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>socket in canoe for mast. lit., stand mast pole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpouli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>befuddled, stupefied, mentally clouded, dazed, carried away with emotion, stricken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpoupou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the name may be qualified by lelo, yellowish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to go down, 
   • walk downhill fast, 
   • stagger; 
   • to bend far forward, as one reeling drunk.
see kānāwai... the kānāwai of Kūkauakahi that no one might bend forward (kūpou)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cigar wrasse fish (Cheilio inermis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpuku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clustered, thick, rank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>days set aside for prayer; to set aside time for prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand around, surround.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taro or sweet potatoes eaten with no preparation other than scraping or baking, i.e., without being pounded into poi or mixed with coconut cream; to take food from the oven and eat it informally; to have potluck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swivel adze (said to be named for a god of canoe makers); to dig, scoop, hew, till.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpākūpā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boom, boom, as of drums.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpāpā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grope, feel, as when looking for flaws in a wooden bowl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpāpā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hand-to-hand fight, struggle; to fight thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpāʻai keʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpāʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak well of one.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpāʻoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to limp; to travel slowly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two pairs, as in poker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpēkia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nervously afraid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpīpī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a reef fish (Abudefduf sordidus). Also ʻōʻō nui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpīpī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of kāpīpī, to sprinkle; to dash, as spray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abscess.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpōlua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fragrance (similar to kūpaoa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long net stretched across the track of fish, one end anchored in deep water, the other in shallow (Malo 210, 212); to set a net at night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scoop net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thick, as gravy, or moisture-laden lomi fish; to jell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outside, outer, foreign.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwaiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sinker on an ʻōpelu net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwalawala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>topsyturvy, handspring; to turn cartwheels.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwaluwalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>much, many.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwelu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>woody shrub with a long tail-like inflorescence resembling cockscomb, perhaps an amaranth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwiliwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of kūwili₁ to move restlessly, embrace, pet, caress...; awhirl, whirling [see the song,  Kūwiliwili iho au (I am all awhirl) by Henri Berger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to move restlessly, 
   • embrace, 
   • pet, caress; 
   • to spin in a dance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūwili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>implement for piercing an ivory ornament.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūāhewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• huge, vast; 
   • name of a farm inland from Kailua, Hawaiʻi, tilled by Kamehameha.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūāhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heap, pile; heaped or piled up; rising up, as a whale's back above water. lit., back heap (āhua).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūāilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be devoured by worms (ilo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūākino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transformation, as from animal to human form.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūākiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stand with hands on hips or crossed in front, as suggestive of the stance of an image (kiʻi) considered a sign of rudeness and an indication that one wants to lord it over others, or as a sign that one will not cooperate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūākāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one of high birth who stands by a kāhili feather standard, beside the high chief, in contrast to the paʻa kāhili who carries the kāhili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūālani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sour, especially of calabashes that have held poi and have not been soaked in the sun after washing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūālauwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>repetitious, confusing in talk and writing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūālole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūāʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn from good to evil; wicked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cry loudly, as with joy or pain; to howl, as a dog; to roar, as a lion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻaeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wander, stray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻai hoʻōla</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ransom. lit., to bargain to save life.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻai pohō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to buy or sell at a loss or very cheaply.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>impatient, annoyed, irritated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sarcastic; sarcasm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻamiʻami</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>motions of turning hinges; motions of sexual intercourse; to turn on hinges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻaoʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>attendant or witness at a wedding. lit., standing [at the] side.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• handle, 
   • stem, stalk, shaft, 
   • stick or mallet used in beating;
   • shank limb of a fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻau kui kele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>needle clamp on a sewing machine. lit., large needle shaft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻau lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arm below the elbow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻau wili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crank. lit., turning handle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻau wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leg; shinbone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>genealogy, pedigree, lineage, old traditions; genealogist, historian; to recite genealogy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻaupaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle, as of pololū spears.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻauʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tread water. lit., stand bathe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻelekā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shiftless; to vagabond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glowing, burning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>askew, placed obliquely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻike₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to know by sight, to understand or know in advance or beforehand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻike₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻiʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• fact, a true statement; true. 
   • sincerity;    
lit., a state of truth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻiʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fleshy, fat. lit., a state of flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>venereal disease of genitals, either sex.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻoho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro; petiole is grass-green with darker shading midway, light above. Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻoho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>medium-sized, deep bowl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>independence, liberty, freedom; independent, free.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sagging, baggy, as clothes; old, as a person with sagging cheeks; to sag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻonoʻono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>well-off, comfortably situated, rich, wealthy, well-to-do, well-supplied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻono₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• nook, cranny, 
   • interior of a house opposite the door, 
   • inside corner of a house; 
   • gulf, bay, cove, 
   • indentation, 
   • cell (of a beehive).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻono₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep, as a cave; deep down, profound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>possible var. of kūlou, bow the head...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻoulena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of coarse tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻoulena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>listless, uninterested.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻoʻili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steep, difficult to climb; to climb with great difficulty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any stone god used to attract fish, whether tiny or enormous, carved or natural, named for the god of fishermen; heiau near the sea for worship of fish gods; hut where fish gear was kept with kūʻula images so that gear might be impregnated with kūʻula mana, usually inland and very taboo. lit., red Kū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻulukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough, high, as billows.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻululū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• chilled, shivering with cold; 
   • shy, abashed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻānoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parched.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to oppose, resist, protest; opposite, versus, adverse, contrary, antagonistic, unwilling; objection. lit., stand different.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻēʻē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disagreement, dissension, opposition, quarrel, bickering, animosity; to quarrel, bicker, disagree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻēʻē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double canoe with one canoe longer than the other.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kūʻōʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broken fragments of sweet potato, as cut by ʻōʻō, digging stick, or spade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₁₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to set apart a period for prayers for a special object; to pray for.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₁₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>months of pregnancy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₁₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abruptly, rudely, defiantly, unceremoniously, without observance of taboos or niceties, brusque.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₁₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stew; to stew.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stand, pedestal, base; 
   • stem, as of a goblet; 
   • frame of a bed, including footboard and headboard; 
   • end, as of a rainbow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• in a state of, 
   • resembling, like, 
   • due to, because of 
 (often followed by i or ā).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to appear, appearance;  arrival.
   • to start, go; beginning, 
   • to achieve; 
   • to change into, transform; 
   • to show, reveal;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to run in schools, as fish; numerous, as octopus in season.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• suitable, proper, O.K., appropriate, fitting; 
   • ready, prepared; 
   • to fit, as clothes; 
   • merit, cause; 
   • to deserve.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rule or reign, as a land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soak, as clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>kū₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to post, as a bond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>L K</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abbreviation for luna kānāwai, judge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lae Manaʻolana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Cape of Good Hope.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laehao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Cape Horn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laemakaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Cape Fear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laenihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sister of the antihero Halemano, who often assumed the form of the fish of the same name and once that of a chicken. She found Halemano's sweetheart for him, and twice brought him back to life after he had died of love sickness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goddess of the hula, maile, ʻieʻie, and other forest plants (UL 24), often identified with Kapoʻulakīnaʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laka₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hero whose log, which was felled for a canoe, was found growing upright the following morning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laka₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a god worshiped by canoe makers; also known as Kuʻōhiʻalaka (upright ʻōhiʻa tree Laka).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lalakoʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Rarotonga, Rarotongan. (Tahitian; the regular Hawaiian correspondent of Tahitian Rarotoʻa would have been Lalokona; the second a in Lalakoʻa probably assimilated to the preceding a).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lalana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old term for London.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lamapeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lambeth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lanakamalama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., the light floats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lanakeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lancaster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lanakila₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind, Hauʻula, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lanikūhana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star. lit., chief stands [at] work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lanipaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rain known at ʻUlupalakua, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lanipōlua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name. see chant, lanipō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lapelana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lapland.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lauaʻe₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind, Honopū, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lauhuki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a goddess worshipped by tapa makers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laukamani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Hālawa, Molokaʻi.  lit., kamani leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laukōwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind associated with Maui. lit., water dragnet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laumaʻomaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind, Punakou, Molokaʻi. lit., green leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lauʻawaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a gentle wind and rain associated with Hāna, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lawaiʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a group of seven stars.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lawakua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a mountain wind at Nāpali, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lawakua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laʻalūʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a legendary people who were said to worship images and not gods, in the time of Wākea or of Hawaiʻi Loa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laʻamaikahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an early immigrant brought from Kahiki by Kila. He introduced image worship in the form of an image called Lonoikaʻoualiʻi  lit., sacredness from afar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laʻelaʻe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Laʻikū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind associated with Hālawa, Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bow low, as the head. lit., earthward forehead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae kiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauā, outcast, with a dot tattooed on the forehead. lit., dotted forehead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae la lae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>syllables repeated in songs at ends of verses to mark time and for gay effect, similar to laʻehana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prominent, as a ridge. lit., double brow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forested point, whether at sea or inland.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae mamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Mamo (bird) brow, a derisive name for kauā, outcasts, perhaps because the mamo, like some kauā, has a black mark on its brow (the yellow feathers of the mamo were prized, not the black).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae oʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an expert. lit., mature brow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae paʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard headed, obstinate, stubborn, closed in mind and hostile to new ideas. lit., hard brow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae paʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>term for kauā, outcast. lit., marked forehead, probably referring to tattoo marks on forehead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae puni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>term for kauā, outcast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae puʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bulging forehead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laehaokela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unicorn, rhinoceros. lit., brow with protruding horn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laehina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as noio, a tern. lit., white brow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laekoloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of hard, red stone, as used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laeloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of wine-red cotton cloth. lit., long brow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laenihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name applied to various high-headed labroid fishes of the genera Hemipteronotus and Iniistius; this name may be qualified by the terms ʻeleʻele, kea, nēnē, pūkea. lit., sharp forehead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laeʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a well-trained, clever person; expert. lit., red brow [red being the sacred color].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cape, headland, point, promontory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wisdom; mental or emotional qualities. cf. idioms at pohā₁ (to burst, crack...), poʻohū₁ (wound, swelling...)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lae₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an insulting term, followed by qualifiers, referring to kauā, outcasts, who had dots tattooed on their foreheads.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laha ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rare, choice, unique; not spread, not common.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahaina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, usually free tasseling, heavy stooling, and with rather semierect to recumbent growth; large, long heavy tops.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahaina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahaina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poising; leaping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahalaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of laha₁, extended, spread out... also said of a hen covering her chickens with her wings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahalaha wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad puddle, pool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahalawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slippery, muddy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahalile₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark navy-blue calico cloth with small white prints or polka dots.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahalile₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• extended, spread out, broad, 
   • published, circulated, distributed, disseminated, promulgated, 
   • advertised, broadcast, widespread, 
   • increased, numerous, 
   • common, general, ordinary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gourd calabash painted with patterns.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of yam with white flesh under the skin (HP 168), contrasting with those with purple-red flesh under the skin that were liked for medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahi kahakaha ʻākala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane; a pink or light red, striped mutation of lahi₂, and otherwise same as lahi. lit., pink-striped lahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahilahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• redup. of lahi₁, thin, frail, delicate....; 
   • weak, as coffee; 
   • flimsy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahilahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>single-flowering, as a hibiscus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, frail, delicate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane; the yellow mutation of laukona, otherwise same as laukona without variegations and stripes and more robust in growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho heʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hernia, rupture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho kole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>raw scrotum (an insulting reference to poverty).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho oʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mature scrotum, said of a male who reaches maturity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho paka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crinkled scrotum (implication that there has been excessive drinking of kava).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bull scrotum, as eaten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho pōkaʻokaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dry scrotum (an insult similar to laho kole).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>promiscuous male.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laholaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>miserly; to hoard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laholena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, indolent, idling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laholio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rubber; automobile tire; elastic, rubbery. lit., horse scrotum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laholio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>India rubber (Ficus elastica).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahopipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eggplant (Solanum melongena).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lahoʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red scrotum (an insult similar to laho kole).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• scrotum; 
   • with qualifiers, a term of abuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• male, as below. 
   • (fig., promiscuous male).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laiki loloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long rice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laikini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>license.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laikini hahai holoholona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hunting license.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laikini kalaiwa kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>driver's license.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laikini kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>auto or vehicle license.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laikini kī pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>firearms license.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>litchi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laimana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>layman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laina kaula waha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reins, lines. lit., bridle (rope mouth) lines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laina mokuahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steamship line.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hives, urticaria
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cane trash, bagasse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laipela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rifle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laipila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>libel; to libel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name applied to the species of Scomberoides, fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakaheke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loghead [loggerhead, thick-headed or stupid person].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tame, domesticated, gentle, docile; attracted to, fond of; to tame, domesticate, attract.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lock, padlock; to lock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jacket, blouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakika₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>radix.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>latitude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ratio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakio like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>proportion, equal ratio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakio like huli hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indirect-inverse or reciprocal proportion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakio like kaukahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>simple proportion or ratio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakio like kūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>direct proportion, equal ratio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakio like ʻano hui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>compound proportion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>supply, provisions, gear, fixtures, plenty; wealth; well-supplied, well-furnished, well-equipped; rich, prosperous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>furniture and fixtures for a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>war supplies, ammunition, munitions, armament.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako keʻena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>office supplies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako kula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>school supplies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako kula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jewelry, especially gold.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako kākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stationery supplies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lako lawaiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing tackle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk incongruously, mixing proper and improper talk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lakuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>raccoon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalahela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, sinful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalahiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark, as of a cloud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>convex; swelling; increasing in size; erect, as male organ.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalakoʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer for luakini dedication.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sun, bask; sunny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spider.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warming, as at a fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• mistake, blunder, blunder, err, 
   • going astray; to go astray, wander, miss the way.
   • gad about, have sexual affairs,
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalau hewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wander in error, sin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thrilling, overwhelmed, transported with emotion; to itch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diagonal, slanting, oblique; diagonal surfing or surf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to warm, as over a fire, to warm oneself by a fire; to bask in the sun; to cook over a fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright, shiny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cap visor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small bait fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to straighten.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a style of diagonal quilting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lala₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the four corners of a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to hasten, hurry, push on; 
   • to encourage, urge on, stir up to action.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legendary bird mentioned in old tales and songs as a sweet singer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greasy, as pork fat; slippery and shiny, glittering, sparkling, bright; sticky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalolalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of humble origin, lowly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laloloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leeward, lee, southern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a ravenous sea bird, perhaps a gull (RSV); cuckoo (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lama hoʻohuihui ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed alcoholic drink, cocktail, highball. lit., mixed rum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lama kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tree mentioned in a chant in (Kam. 76:118).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lama kuhikuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beacon, signal light.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lama paʻipaʻi ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., mixed rum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lamakū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• large torch, formerly 60 to 90 cm [2 - 3 feet] tall, with the light coming from burning kukui nuts strung on a coconut midrib and wrapped in dried ti leaves and placed at the tips of bamboo handles; 
   • signal fires; 
   • lantern (Lunk. 7.16) ; 
   • sparks, as of a torch (Isa. 50.11) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lamakū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for a medicine applied to sores.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lamalama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>torch fishing; torch; to go torch fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lamalama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• fair-complexioned; 
   • bright-looking; 
   • animated; 
   • vivacious; 
   • to glow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all endemic kinds of ebony (Diospyros, synonym Maba), hardwood trees with small flowers and fruits.  lama wood was used in medicine and placed in hula altars because its name suggested enlightenment; huts were built of lama wood in a single day during daylight (lama) hours, and the sick were placed inside them for curing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>torch, light, lamp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lama₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rum; any intoxicating drink.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lamie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ramie, an introduced plant (Boehmeria nivea), related to the māmaki, and yielding a strong fiber used for rope, paper, cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lana hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drift, as a ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanaau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to float or drift with the current; to look about in every direction, wander, ramble, drift aimlessly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanahaʻakei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>haughty, superior-acting. lit., proudly floating.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crook, protuberance, hump; bent out, convex.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanahō!</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land ho!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanakoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ask for insistently; to desire greatly; great desire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanalana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lashings, as of ornamental sennit binding the float (ama) to outrigger booms (ʻiako).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanalana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spider.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanalana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ylang-ylang (Cananga odorata).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lananuʻu mamao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oracle tower; the lowest floor was the lana, the second and more sacred floor was the nuʻu, and the top, where the high priest stood to conduct services was the mamao.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lananuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high frame where heiau images were placed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lananuʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>image placed in front of a heiau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unfriendly, unsociable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lowest floor of the oracle tower where offerings were placed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be aware of noises as one wakes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani aliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>royal chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani haʻahaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>low sky, of the low sky, a poetic reference to Hāna, Maui, and its rains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani kua kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poetic name for a very high chief or the highest heaven. lit., sky with rolling ridge [i.e., clouds].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani nuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>highest heavens, an epithet for royalty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>firmament. lit., solid heaven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>similar to lemi wai, a water lemon (Passiflora foetida). Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani wela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Canada fleabane (Conyza canadensis), a weedy composite herb from temperate North America, with long, straight hairy stem, hairy, narrow leaves, and clusters of small flower heads. On Niʻihau Conyza bonariensis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanikaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>individual privileged to sit with the chief while the latter ate; he might eat the remnants of the chief's food, thus preventing them from falling into the hands of a sorcerer. lit., chief at edge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanikeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legendary part of heaven; frequent name for residences of high chiefs, as that of Kamehameha III at Lahaina, Maui.  lit., lofty heaven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanikuʻuwaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind of Kalalau, Kauaʻi.  lit., heaven releasing canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lanipō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dense, dark, lush, as of plants, rain; said of luxuriant growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laniuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>both flowering and aromatic-leaved pelargoniums also called rose geraniums.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• very high chief, 
   • majesty; 
   • host (Isa. 34.4) ; 
   • royal, exalted, high born, noble, aristocratic. 
    This meaning is most common in personal names, as Leilani, royal child or heavenly lei; Pualani, descendant of royalty or heavenly flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lani₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kinds of flowers. see:
     lani aliʻi₂, lanialiʻi, same as nani aliʻi, shrubs, allamandas... 
     lanipō, dense, dark, lush, as of plants, rain; said of luxuriant growth.
     laniuma, both flowering and aromatic-leaved pelargoniums also called rose geraniums. 
     lani wai, laniwai, similar to lemi wai, a water lemon (Passiflora foetida). Niʻihau.
     lani wela, laniwela, Canada fleabane (Conyza canadensis), a weedy composite herb
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of haoa₃, 
   • eel-catching stick [gorge]; 
   • to fish with this stick; 
   • to choke, as on a bone.    
(var. pronunciations are laʻoa, haoa, and haʻoa.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laolao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep booming sound, as of distant surf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flame, blaze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blood clot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa uila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lightning flash; to flash, as lightning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agitated fresh water, rippling water, cascading water; shining water, as in the sunlight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapaiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small drum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>excessively active.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapalapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steep-ridged, many-ridged.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapalapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup of lapa₂, overactive, energetic, mischievous; gamboling and cavorting...;  
   • to bubble, boil, 
   • blaze; 
   • to cavort.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapalapa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clotted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapalapa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native mountain trees (Cheirodendron), in the panax family, conspicuous for the slender-stemmed leaves, each leaf with three to five, rarely six or seven leaflets that flutter (lapalapa) in the breeze.  see also hū ʻōlapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapalapa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for a large mahimahi, dolphin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapauila₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>booms joining hulls of a double canoe, corresponding to ʻiako of a single canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amniotic fluid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapawāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shin, shank. lit., leg ridge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapaʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• medical practice; medical, medicinal.
   • to treat with medicine, 
   • heal, cure;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ridge, slope, steep side of a ravine; ridged.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• overactive, 
   • energetic, 
   • mischievous; 
   • gamboling and cavorting, as a young animal; 
   • roughhouse; 
   • to flash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bamboo liners, for tapa printing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>orifice of the womb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clot, as of blood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male mahimahi fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapa₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slacken off the lower section on an ʻōpelu bag net; part of the catch remains in the water, and the top part only of the net is raised to the canoe and the catch taken; a large catch would be too heavy to bring up at once.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rabbi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• ghost (Isa. 34.14) , apparition, phantom, specter;
   •  haunted; to haunt; 
   • to act as a ghost.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapulapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to pick up, as sticks for fuel; 
   • to collect, gather; 
   • to handle, 
   • tie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lapuʻuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hump, crook, arch; a humping, arching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau alelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tongue tip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leaf of hau tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau kalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taro leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau kapalili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hukilau, seine fishing, but reportedly used in deeper water and with yellowed ti or banana leaves. lit., trembling net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau kapalili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legendary name for trembling leaves of the first taro, said to have been born of a woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leaf of a koa tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau kī pala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellowed ti leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau kī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau kī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tea leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small-leafed; qualifying term for some plants, as maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau loa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau loa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>length; lengthwise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wauke leaf. lit., clothing leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau makani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>puff of wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau manamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a divided leaf; many leaves, many branches; descendants, as of a family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau mauʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blade of grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau nahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plants, forest growth or leaves, herbs, greenery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut leaf, frond.  see hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau pala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fading leaf turning yellow, red, or brown. fig., person failing in health.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau poʻopoʻohina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stream or pond full of water; many streams: abundance of water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salad. lit., edible leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau ʻawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kava leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau ʻawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first two or three taro leaves, as offered with kava leaves with prayers for a good food supply.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau ʻoliwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• olive leaves; 
   • perhaps formerly used fig. for letters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau ʻōpae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shrimp net, about a fathom long, placed around a heap of rocks called ahu or imu (fish and shrimp were prodded and frightened from the rock pile into the net); this type of fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>not much remaining to do, progressing, nearly finished (commonly used after a negative).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to destroy, as by fire or lava flow. 
   • fig., quick, deft (as after lima); 
   • greedy, lecherous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bag net used for fish, as ʻōhua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cooperate, work together, as of experts; to concentrate on the same task; to pool talents.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauaʻe haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fern (Phlebodium aureum), hare's-foot fern, from tropical America, much like the lauaʻe, but with larger, dull light-green scentless fronds. First collected in Hawaiʻi in mountains of Kauaʻi (August, 1909), probably as an escape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauaʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fragrant fern (Phymatosorus scolopendria syn. Microsorium scolopendria); when crushed, its fragrance suggests that of maile; famous for its fragrance on Kauaʻi (see lauaʻe₂). Pieces were strung in pandanus leis between the keys. see chant, punia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beloved, sweet, of a lover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauaʻe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather together, collect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wander mentally, imagine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhalalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vagabond, drifter, one as useless as pandanus leaves adrift in the sea. lit., floating pandanus leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brightly colored butterfly fish (Chaetodon quadrimaculatus and C. umimaculatus). This name may be qualified by the terms kapuhili, kīkākapu, maha uli, nuku ʻiʻiwi or nuku ʻiwi, and wiliwili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blade of a paddle
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to paddle together and uniformly, either in the same or different canoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of ʻoʻopu, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhue₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of poisonous gourd; to spread, of this vine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhuki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa soaking, to soak tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dry banana leaf; 
   • to wrap, as a bundle, with ti leaves inside and banana leaves outside. 
   • fig., outsider, one from another locality (sometimes said disparagingly).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• fast, swift, as of destruction; 
   • to seize, as an ʻahi seizes a hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauhuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clear, remove, as mulch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a parrotfish (Scarus dubius).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukahi kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mountain laukahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukahi lau nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of laukahi. lit., big-leafed laukahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukahi liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native sword-shaped fern (Elaphoglossum sp.) lit., small laukahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukahi nunui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native sword-shaped fern (Elaphoglossum aemulum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukahi nunui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad-leafed plantain. lit., large laukahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad-leafed plantain (Plantago major), a Eurasian stemless weed, with thick broad leaves, 2.5 to 25 cm long, forming a rosette near the ground, and with tiny flowers developing in a cylindrical head at the tip of a slender stalk; used externally to ripen and heal boils, internally for diabetes and other ailments.  lit., single leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marsh pennywort (Hydrocotyle verticillata). Niʻihau. cf. pohe₂ and (Neal 659).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukalakoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snowbush (Breynia disticha syn. B. nivosa) from South Pacific islands. It has rounded-oval leaves, mottled green and white, or, in one variety, green, white, red, and pink. lit., calico (Eng.) leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>laudanum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uninterested in religion, indifferent to religion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>densely populated, having many people; many people; to populate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tough, hardy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>planted sweet-potato vine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukapalala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legendary name for broad leaves of the first taro, said to have been born of a woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small tree or shrub (Claoxylon sandwicense, var. tomentosum and degeneri; C. helleri) on Kauaʻi only, in the euphorbia family, having leaves to about 8 by 18 cm and small clustered flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard gray stone, used for adzes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray with age or sickness; pale, as an invalid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feather out, as young birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane with green and yellow striped canes and leaves; used in sorcery, because of the meaning of laukōnā, to break the influence of the hana aloha love magic and change love into hatred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>confused, repetitious, mixed, incoherent, as speech; miscellaneous; irregular-shaped, as some leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take or gather indiscriminately. Similar to hāpuku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one skilled in many trades, a jack-of-all-trades.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish pond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukāhiʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of shark, possibly thresher. lit., much hit tail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cosmopolitan tropical weed (Cassia leschen-aultiana), a small shrub with finely divided leaves, yellow flowers, and small narrow pods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dragnet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukō pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing for young fish (pua) with fine nets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukōnā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• hardhearted, merciless, heartless, 
   • unfriendly, implacable; 
   • furious, very angry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laukūkahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Lindsaya macraena), with narrow, divided fronds. Hawaiʻi. lit., leaf that is alone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• spread far and wide, as news, widespread; 
   • circulated, publicized; 
   • of common or general knowledge; 
   • spread contagiously, as a disease. 
   • lit., much spread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulahilahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design on a Niʻihau mat. lit., many torches or lama tree leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sociable, friendly, gregarious, genial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hat rim.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pregnant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>paddle blade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>butterfly weed or milkweed (Asclepias curassavica), a tropical American perennial herb 60 to 90 cm high, with umbels of small orange and yellow flowers and pods full of tufted, wind-borne seeds; the leaves were eaten in time of famine; the Monarch butterfly feeds on the leaves. lit., flying leaf.  see also hī laulele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dandelion (Taraxacum officinale).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>net fishing with small nets as in shallow water (usually used with lawaiʻa or papa)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peace, happiness, friendship; restoration of a disrupted friendship; happy, glad, genial, courteous, peaceful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulihilihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a slender, prostrate shrub in the pink family (Schiedea stellarioides), endemic to Kauaʻi, with small, linear leaves, and large open panicles of small flowers. lit., bordered leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cooperation, joint action; group of people working together; community food patch; to work together, cooperate. lit., many hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, said to be the original taro brought to Hawaiʻi. Sometimes poetically called hāloa₃, long stalk, because a god of that name was said to have been in the form of this taro. This name may be qualified by the terms hāʻeleʻele or ʻeleʻele; ʻeleʻele ʻōmaʻo, ʻeleʻele ʻula or palakea ʻeleʻele; hāʻula, koko, ʻulaʻula, or palakea ʻula; uliuli or hāuliuli; keʻokeʻo; manini; ʻōniʻoniʻo; palakea or palakea papamū; pānaʻe; poni. (HP 33), (TC 3).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane. When young, yellow-green, striped with light yellow-brown; with exposure, a deep olive, striped with dark brown-red; broad, long, green leaves; large stalks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauloa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long wave or surf, as extending from one end of the beach to the other.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laulā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• broad, wide; 
   • liberal; 
   • width, breadth, extent; 
   • widely known; 
   • publicly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumaki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>low stroke in club fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumanamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• smooth, 
   • sheer, 
   • steep, 
   • even.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insult, taunt, sneer, reproach, contempt; to insult, taunt, mock; taunting, mocking, sneering, derisive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design on a tapa beater, said to suggest the maʻu leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumeki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of barbed spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumeki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to recede, ebb, as the tide or flood waters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumeki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wilt, as plants without water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumilo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to writhe, turn, twist, squirm, torture, destroy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumilo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of eel, so called because its color was thought to resemble a yellow milo leaf (lau milo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laumāewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sway with the movement of the wind, as leaves; to move to and fro, as algae in the sea; blown here and there, as sea spray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launa aloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>friendly association, fellowship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launa male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marriage relationship; marital rights (RSV), marital duties (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launa palapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>correspondence; to correspond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launa ʻole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unequalled, incomparable, unsurpassed, superior (similar to ana ʻole and lua ʻole).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launa ʻole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsociable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bare, as of leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design on a tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>launui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro. lit., large leaf, large design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauoha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sail of a vessel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauoha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dense, lush, of vegetation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauoha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variation in vision, depending on distance of the object seen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauoho kuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hair switch, wig. lit., added hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauoho uliuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one with dark hair, brunette; dark hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauohoopele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pele's hair, volcanic glass spun out in hairlike form.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauohoopele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine, hairlike seaweed, found at Waikīkī.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soil light, fertile, and easy to cultivate; alluvial soil, sandy soil. lit., sand surface.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laupalai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shine, glitter, sparkle, as dew in the sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laupapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a broad flat, as of coral, lava, reef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laupapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>board, lumber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laupau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laupaʻapaʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>merry, jolly, humorous, laugh-provoking, funny, playful, witty. lit., much playing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laupaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first two leaves of a taro shoot (according to some, the first three leaves).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laupaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a great many, multitude, great quantity, heap; to increase, multiply; to have much of; well supplied with.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• circuitous, roundabout, indirect, 
   • turning, twisting, 
   • unstable, fickle, changeable, inconstant, 
   • double-tongued, 
   • variable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauwiliwili nukunuku ʻoiʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>butterfly fishes (Forcipiger longirostris and F. flavissimus). lit., sharp-beaked wiliwili leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauwiliwili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a butterfly fish (Chaetodon miliaris).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauāhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rumor, hearsay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>common; commoner. lit., much public.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>contraction of lau kalo, taro leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻamaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa-beater design. lit., ʻamaʻu fern pattern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻapoʻapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of lau fishing outside the reef, seine. lit., catching seine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻauʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to withhold; stingy. fig. to withhold or conceal strength, as a warrior (Malo 196, 203) or gambler; this may refer to the common tale motif of the idol hero who enters the battle only after his confederates are losing, as of Kawelo, Pele, Panaʻewa. Another figurative use concerns a woman unattractive to males, and (AP) a lottery or game of chance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pagoda flower (Clerodendrum buchananii var. fallax), a low shrub with downy heart-shaped leaves and clusters of scarlet flowers, native to Java.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a grass endemic to Niʻihau, Panicum niihauense. lit., red leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻekī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>top, as of sugar-cane tassel or of shell ginger about to bloom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glow with heat, anger, passion
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Doodia spp.), somewhat like kupukupu₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of sweet potato. lit., red leaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indistinct, as the voice of a sick person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti leaf. Also lāʻī, lau kī.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻī pekepeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short, stunted ti leaves; a term of opprobrium for the kauā (outcast), as such ti leaves were of less value than long leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar-cane leaf (same as lau kō).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lauʻō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young white coconut leaves near the heart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dragnet, seine, so called because formerly made of ti leaves (lau) tied to a rope.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sheet; surface; blade, as of grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be much, many; very many, numerous; four hundred. [traditional 4-based counting: kāuna 4; kaʻau 40; lau 400; mano 4,000; kini 40,000; lehu 400,000]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pattern, as for quilts; design; print of a cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatched mountain hut, as used by farmers, canoe-makers, birdcatchers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tip, as of the tongue; top (probably related to wēlau and ʻēlau, tip).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lau₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet-potato slip or vine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa lua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very strong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa lua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bind tightly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa puni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>enough for all, well-supplied or equipped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawaaʻeaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white mixed with a darker color, as of a chicken; dark hair streaked with gray; white chicken with sprinkling of red feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawaiʻa kō lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the old name for hukilau fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawaiʻa kōkō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fishing within the reef, as by women and children, with long bags of fine mesh into which fish were driven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawaiʻamanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>birdcatcher, birdcatching with a net. lit., to fish birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawaiʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cormorant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawakua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong-backed, muscular, of strong physique, bulging with muscles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawakua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to bind or tie fast, as on the back. 
   • fig., to be a dear friend or companion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawalawaihonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of large wooden bowl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawalawaiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fish here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>possessed of enough or ample knowledge, hence wise, capable, competent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>as soon as.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong, husky; strong man, as in a king's retinue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bind, make fast, tie securely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white, as of a cock or dog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawa₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large shark fishhook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe hae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bear a flag; color bearer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take here and there.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe hānai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to adopt, as a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe kapakahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to act with partiality.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe kāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bearer of the feather standard of royalty (kāhili).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry by hand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe ola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manslaughter, homicide; to take a life; to take alive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe pio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• conquest; conquer,
   • to capture, take captive, take a prisoner, carry into captivity.
    • abduct
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a great flow of water; water carrier; water-borne.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extortion, seizure of property with the owner's knowledge; to extort, take without right.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe ʻōhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>passenger carrier; to carry passengers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• talebearer, tattle; 
   • gossip; to gossip, bear tales; 
   • microphone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laweau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drift apart; to depart, as in death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawehala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sin, sinner, sinful; to sin, transgress.
   • delinquency, delinquent, 
   • offense; 
   • evil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawehana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>workman, laborer; industrious; to do labor, work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawekeō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cry of the kioea, curlew bird: 'Kioea, kioea, lawekeō, lawelawekeō'.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawelawe hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>function, administration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawelawe iwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who cares for the bones of the dead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawelawe kolohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take illegally, without permission, tamper with.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawelawe lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to carry in the hand; anything carried in the hand.
   • to pitch in and lend a hand, help; 
   • to assault, beat, tackle;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawelawe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to serve, work for, minister to, tend, attend to, serving (HE).   • do, perform, transact;    • to treat, as the sick;    • to wait, as on tables;    • to handle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawelawe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pilfer, make off with.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawelua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to study both sides of a question; to act impartially. lit., take two.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>getting, acquiring, taking, carrying, acquisition; movement, as of dancing hands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laweālani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>highest heavens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laweʻaiʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to borrow, take on credit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lawe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>finally to become; to become.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred light, sacred things of day, as sunshine, knowledge, happiness. lit., light sacredness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa make</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>season when plants die or grow slowly, like autumn in cooler climates. lit., dead season.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rainy season.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred or doomed darkness, ignorance, gloom, the unknown, misfortune.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa ulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spring, time of growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>autumn. lit., red time [of leaves].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻaloa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>varieties of small, narrow-bodied kitchen roaches including the brown-banded cockroach (Supella supellectilium) and the German cockroach (Blatella germanica or Symploce hospes). Perhaps named for Olaʻa, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻalāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• small sticks, twigs, 
   • herbs, 
   • shrubs, 
   • bush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻamia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calabash tree (Crescentia cujete), introduced from tropical America, fruit used for hula rattle with aliʻipoe seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sacred, holy, 
   • devoted, consecrated, 
   • set apart or reserved as for sacred purposes, 
   • dedicated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• cursed, defiled (Kanl. 22.9) , 
   • bound under an oath, 
   • doomed to death or destruction (FS 120–3), 
   • in great trouble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>time, season (perhaps short for lāʻau and a missionary introduction).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to propagate plants by inarching [to graft by uniting a growing branch to a stock without separating the branch from its parent stock].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>also, together with, so, besides, such as, like.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pure in sentiment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻehana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>syllables repeated in chants at ends of verses to mark time and for gay effect, similar to ehehene.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻelaʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bright, 
   • shiny, 
   • clear, 
   • serene, calm, 
   • pleasant.   •
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻelaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• calm, stillness, quiet, peace, contentment, tranquillity; 
   • solace; 
   • serene, as of sea, sky, wind; 
   • quiet, silent, peaceful, pacific, tranquil, contented; 
   • to find peace.     see ex., forecast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻikū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>great calm, quiet, peace, serenity; becalmed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻilaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup of laʻi, calm, stillness, quiet, peace, contentment, tranquillity; solace; serene, as of sea, sky, wind...; light-hearted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻilaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻiokona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato. lit., calm of Kona.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻiokona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design on a tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be peaceful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻolaʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lack of satisfaction, even discomfort, resulting from eating unaccustomed or foreign food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻolaʻo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• kindling; 
   • small sticks placed at a break in a bank of a taro patch; 
   • trash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻolaʻo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough, pitted, calloused.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>laʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>having something in the eye, as a mote or eyelash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>goddess of canoe builders... wife of Kūmokuhāliʻi, and sister of Hinapukuʻai, who sometimes assumed her form. Both sisters took the form of an ʻelepaio flycatcher to help canoe makers choose proper logs (see Hinapukuʻai). She was also called Hinakūwa'a (canoe upright) and Laea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lehuakona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star in the Milky Way, perhaps Antares. lit., south lehua flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lehua₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the small island just west of Niʻihau. As the westernmost of the Hawaiian Islands (except for the Northwest Hawaiian Islands), Lehua is associated with a setting sun (see chant, kalakalaʻihi). In poetry, the extent of the Hawaiian Islands is shown by coupling Lehua Island and Haʻehaʻe and Kumukahi on East Hawaiʻi . A breeze is named for this island.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lekahone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Leghorn (city and chicken)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lekinekona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lexington.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Leleaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Milky Way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Leleiona₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Milky Way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lelekuʻilua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a strong, wintry wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Leleuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a gusty, wintry wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lena₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, perhaps Sirius.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lena₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a yellow-tinted rain famous at Hanalei, Kauaʻi, and on Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lepanona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Lebanon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lepupalika₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Republican (political party). A newspaper, 1901–2, was entitled Home Rula Republalika.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lewalewa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nickname for Gilbertese, because their stretched ear lobes dangled. [see  Grimble's Tungaru Traditions for a description of this former Gilbertese practice]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lewa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Lewika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Levites.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Leʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the zenith star Arcturus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glance about, as with expectation or furtively.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, neglectful; to loaf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehe luhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pouting lip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehe ʻoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp-lipped, an epithet often applied to Pele because she devoured everything in her path; sharp-tongued, of one who makes cutting remarks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehelehe kiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indolent talker; to do nothing but talk. lit., image lips.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehelehe nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thick lips.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehelehenui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehelehe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• lips; 
   • labia of vagina; 
   • language (Kin. 11.1; rare) , 
   • mouth of the iheihe net. 
   • fig. cf lehelehe kiʻi, indolent talker; to do nothing but talk, lehelehe nui (thick lips), hoʻolehelehe nui, sullen, obstinate, sulky, pouting, lehe ʻoi, sharp-tongued, of one who makes cutting remarks....
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lip (used with complements, as lehe luhe, lehe ʻoi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stretched, loose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep-sea fish resembling ulua, perhaps Caranx chelio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skilled, expert, as in fishing; deft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>admirable, attractive; to admire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of cowry (Cypraea mauritiana). lit., fire cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho kupa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the serpent-head cowry (Cypraea caput-serpentis). lit., native cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho kōlea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of cowry (Cypraea maculifera, C. mauritiana). lit., kōlea bird cowry, perhaps so called because its brown streaks suggest the kōlea bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho kūpeʻe lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of cowry shell (Cypraea caput-serpentis), used for bracelets, kūpeʻe lima.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as leho puna, sometimes used in leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the common dotted, brown cowry. lit., genuine cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho nuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cowry with the extremities drawn out, a beaked cowry, such as Cypraea cicercula var. tricornis; sometimes used in leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as leho puna, but with a yellow hue. lit., ivory cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cowry of a solid color, as Cypraea mauritiana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho pouli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a very dark-brown cowry (Cypraea mauritiana).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho puna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a white money cowry (Cypraea moneta). lit., coral cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho pāuhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cowries, as Cypraea schilderdrum, C. carneola.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho ʻuala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare dark-yellow money cowry (Cypraea moneta). lit., sweet-potato cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the rare and highly prized red cowry, probably Cypraea sp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho ʻōkala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of cowry (Cypraea granulata). lit., rough cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho ʻōmaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a greenish cowry (diseased cowries sometimes turn green).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho ʻōpule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of cowry (Cypraea helvola). lit., variegated cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho ʻōpuʻupuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., bumpy or rough cowry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leholeho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>potbellied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehopulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>earth-clinging rainbow. lit., wet cowry shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for cowry shell; they were used as octopus lures.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>callus, as on shoulders from carrying heavy loads.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>leho₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>covetous. cf. maka leho.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehu ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ashes. lit., fire ash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehu ane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ash dust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehu pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>volcanic ash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehu ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red ashes; reddish dust or dirt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red- or white-flowered species of Calliandra shrubs from various parts of America. lit., foreign lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua haʻakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., white lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua hāmau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poetic reference to the lehua tree. lit., silent lehua, so called because bird-catchers were silent when snaring birds on branches of this tree and this activity was taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clover. lit., foreign lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro called waiākea in Kona, Hawaiʻi. lit., white lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua lau liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a form of ʻōhiʻa lehua tree with very small leaves. lit., small-leafed lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua maka noe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small shrub (Metrosideros pumila var. makanoiensis), restricted to the high bogs of Kauaʻi, with leaves and flowers like those of lehua. lit., lehua with misty face.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua maka ʻiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety or taro.  lit., small-eyed lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua mamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a form of ʻōhiʻa lehua tree with yellow flowers. lit., mamo-bird lehua, so called because the mamo has yellow feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua mau loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>globe amaranth (Gomphrena globosa). lit., everlasting lehua, so called because its flowers when used in leis do not wilt. Also lehua pepa and leihua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua neʻeneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., spreading lehua. same as lehua neneʻe, lehua maka.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua palaʻiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, of common upland culture in Kona, Hawaiʻi. The plant is short to medium, slender, with lilac-purple corm flesh and dark green petioles; used for poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native shrub or small tree (Metrosideros rugosa), found in high forests of the Koʻolau Range, Oʻahu, and distinguished by its rounded, leathery, grooved leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua pepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., paper lehua, so called because the texture of the flowers and the fact that they do not wilt suggest paper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua pua kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a form of ʻōhiʻa lehua tree with white flowers (pua kea).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro; corm white or slightly pink; may be a sport of a true lehua. lit., black lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua ʻāhihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of lehua (Metrosideros tremuloides), noted in songs and chants of Nuʻuanu Valley, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua ʻāpane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of lehua tree bearing dark-red flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua ʻōniʻoniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro. lit., spotted lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehuakūikawao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of pink lehua taro. lit., lehua standing in the uplands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehuakūkuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro. lit., hill-standing lehua taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehuakūmakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a form of lehua with sessile cordate leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the flower of the ʻōhiʻa tree (Metrosideros macropus, M. collina subsp. polymorpha); also the tree itself. The lehua is the flower of the island of Hawaiʻi, as designated in 1923 by the Territorial legislature; it is famous in song and tale. see nāpolupolu, pōkiʻi₁, ʻūpolu. fig., a warrior, beloved friend or relative, sweetheart, expert (see lehua₉). The plant has many forms, from tall trees to low shrubs, leaves round to narrow and blunt or pointed and smooth or woolly. The flowers are red, rarely salmon, pink, yellow, or white. The wood is hard, good for flooring and furniture, formerly used for images, spears, mallets. (Neal 637–8). It grows abundantly in wet areas (see ex., ʻūpolu). It was believed that picking lehua blossoms would cause rain. For rain and wind names associated with lehua see Kanilehua, Kinailehua. Kinimakalehua, Kiu Wai Lehua, Līlīlehua, Moanianilehua, Moelehua. see also lū lehua, Moaʻe Lehua, ʻōiwi₂ (chant). cf. Marquesan heʻua
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>laden, as a lehua tree with beautiful blossoms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rainbow-colored mother-of-pearl shell used for fishing lure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, used for red poi. Cultivars may be qualified by the terms keʻokeʻo (white) or maoli (native).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>globe amaranth (Gomphrena globosa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam; the stem has red wings and the tuber has light pinkish flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehua₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>expert, as in fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehulehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• multitude, crowd, population, 
   • the public; 
   • great number, numerous,  legion, very many, innumerable, myriad.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehuliʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white-hot, as oven stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehuuila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flashes of lightning; to flash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ashes; ash-colored or gray, as a chicken. see saying, ash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, probably recently introduced, extensively planted by Hawaiians. The stunted mature stalks look dead except for their green leaves. A gray to green-brown frosted-looking cane covered with hairs; pith green-white; both sides of leaves bearing long scattered hairs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the number 400,000; numerous, very many. [traditional 4-based counting: kāuna 4; kaʻau 40; lau 400; mano 4,000; kini 40,000; lehu 400,000]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lehēlehē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fat, bulging with fat, unwieldy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>royal lei, chief's lei, crown (Hoik. 4.4) , diadem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei haku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>braided lei, as of ferns and flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei made principally or solely of pandanus keys, sometimes considered bad luck because hala, pandanus, also means to pass away, to fail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei hili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a plaited lei, as of ferns and maile but without leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei hoaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>necklace made of crescent-shaped (hoaka) hog's tusks, usually naturally, so shaped, but sometimes carved; a pendant of a single crescent-shaped tooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei hulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feather lei, formerly worn by royalty. fig., dearly beloved child or choice person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei humuhumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloth lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei kolona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rosary, prayer beads. lit., crown (Eng.) lei .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei kui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a strung lei, as of plumeria.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kukui nut lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei kāmoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feather lei with feathers tightly folded together so that it suggests a rope, in contrast with the flat lei papa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei leho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei of cowry shells.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei niho ʻīlio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dog-tooth necklace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei ole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dog-tooth lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei ole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻana, pumice stone used for medicine and for polishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ivory pendant, originally probably whale's tooth, rarely of stone or wood, later also of walrus tusk; necklace of beads of whale's teeth; today, any pendant shaped like the old whale-tooth pendant, such as of beef bone. lit., ivory lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flat lei, as for a hat; any lei on a flat surface, especially a feather lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei paukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei with stripes or bands of varying colors. lit., link lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei piki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei made of feathers of uneven length that protrude unevenly, as of mamo feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ox yoke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei pipipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei of pipipi shell, a new type of lei; formerly kūpeʻe ornaments were called lei pipipi because of a superficial resemblance
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei with flowers strung on stems or sides of flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei worn on the head (poʻo).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei pāniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei of various colors, as feather leis. lit., spotted, motley lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei pāpahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• leis of alternating groups of flowers and leaves, 
   • entwined leis of same or different flowers; 
   • adornment of several leis, usually both on head and around neck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei pāpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hatband.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei pūpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shell lei, the most famous being from Niʻihau, especially kahelelani and momi. These leis represent Niʻihau in the leis of the islands, as designated in 1923 by the Territorial legislature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei pūpū puka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei of white sea-perforated shells worn by men and women about the neck, popular in Hawaiʻi since the late 1960s. lit., perforated shell lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei waena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lei strung in the center of flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei wili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lei that is not strung (kui): the leaves or flowers are entwined about each other, as maile leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>lei wiliwili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pendant carved of wiliwili wood; lei of wiliwili seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>