<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiʻaki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of ʻaki₁, to take a nip and let go, snap; to nibble, as fish...
   • to nibble, as a fish;
   • constant snapping at, 
   • attacking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiʻaki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seashore rush grass (Sporobolus virginicus), a coarse grass growing on sandy beaches; used to exorcise spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiʻaki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of coarse red seaweed (Ahnfeltia concinna) which because of its toughness must be eaten in little bites; a good source of carrageenin, a colloid. Called ʻeleau on Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiʻikiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dip net, as used in fishing uhu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to take a nip and let go, snap; to nibble, as fish;    • to bite off the bark of sugar cane;    • to heal, as a wound;    • to scar over;    • sharp recurring pain, as in head or stomach.    • fig., to attack, taunt, malign, snap at;    • slander (Hal. 50.20) ;    • backbiter (Roma 1.30) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>height, tip, top (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaki₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pillow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaki₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>block on which a canoe is placed on the shore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaki₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>filled, as a canoe with waves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small tree resembling koa; dye was made from its bark, and to color tapa. (And) But cf. kūʻoulena.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety or taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a nut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, deep-red and green when young, changing to purple and brown-yellow; pith dark-brown; larger and stronger than ʻakilolo, especially in wet districts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>endemic shrubs and trees (Euphorbia spp.) with jointed stems, opposite leaves, and milky sap. Buds and leaves of one species (E. multiformis) were chewed for debility.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakoleana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>accordion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poor, destitute, shiftless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large endemic fern (Dryopteris unidentata), 1 m or more high, with triangular-oblong fronds much subdivided.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakolika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ostrich.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to creep, attempt to creep; to put out small roots, as potatoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>three (as in counting in a series); three times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakomika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>atomic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakopie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adobe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakoʻako₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crest of a wave; to break or swell, as waves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻako₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• itch, 
   • throat irritation, 
   • venereal disease. 
   • fig., lust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakukana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adjutant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakukana kenelala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adjutant general.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to beat, as tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakulekele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adultery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakulikuli kai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tropical American, low succulent (Batis maritima), commonly forming a continuous green cover by salt marshes. Locally called pickleweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broken or cut off, as a pencil point; blunt, stumpy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakupa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small endemic tree (Bobea mannii).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakēʻakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian storm petrel (Oceanodroma castro cryptoleucura).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic lobelia (Cyanea tritomantha), a small tree 2 to 3 m high, with clustered leaves (up to 78 by 20 cm), somewhat downy beneath. The leaves were cooked and eaten like cabbage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tossing about, agitated; jolting, as a vehicle on a rough road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakūʻakū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swaying, as a canoe in rough sea; not steady; bumpy, as a road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakūʻakū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hasty, poorly done, rash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakūʻakū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic lobelia (Cyanea rollandioides) 1 to 1.4 m high, with rough leaves to 50 by 15 cm. The leaves were cooked like cabbage or taro tops or sweet potato leaves, with pork or salt beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaaumoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a West Indian shrub, night cestrum (Cestrum nocturnum), Chinese inkberry, with narrow leaves and narrow, tubular, green-to-creamy white flowers, which are most fragrant at night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalae awī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the introduced Australian gallinule Porphyrio poliocephalus, P. p. melanotus. Also applied to a form of ʻalae kea, with brownish frontal knob.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalae kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian coot (Fulica americana alai), a marsh and pond bird, distinguished from ʻalae ʻula by its ivory-white frontal knob; endangered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalae nū kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., white-beaked ʻalae.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalae ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian gallinule or mudhen (Gallinula chloropus sandvicensis), distinguished from ʻalae kea by its reddish bill and frontal plate; endangered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark-red ʻalaea. lit., male ʻalaea₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea wahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light-red ʻalaea. lit., female ʻalaea₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• water-soluble colloidal ocherous earth, used for coloring salt, for medicine, for dye, and formaly in the purification ceremony called hiʻuwai; 
   • any red colloring matter;    • according to Dr. Frank Tabrah, brick-red soil containing hematite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flesh like redness, especially the dark red meat close to the spine of some fish, as of the aku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>annatto dye plant (Bixa orellana), a tropical American shrub or small tree, bearing fruit with scarlet seeds, used for dyeing. Sometimes called ʻalaea lāʻau to distinguish from the earth; locally also called lipstick plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tribe or clan; 
   • people in a district who have intermarried.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bad breath, halitosis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaea₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fore part of thigh; long narrow thigh muscle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mudhen or Hawaiian gallinule (Gallinula chloropus sandvicensis), a black wading bird with red frontal plate; cry of this bird is believed a bad omen; some considered the ʻalae an ʻaumakua; endangered. For the coot, see ʻalae kea. see saying, keʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaiaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an upland bird, gray, about rite size of the ʻelepaio, reported in 1863.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>potbellied, bloated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalakapaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>allspice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalakenika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arsenic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalakuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large crab (Carpilius maculatus), with 11 dark red spots on its back, usually found concealed in rocks or under stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jump, hurry from place to place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dry or wither leaves over a fire, as of tobacco.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalauā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of the red ʻāweoweo fish. Appearance of schools of this fish near shore was an omen that royalty would die.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sickly, weak, fretful, as a child; fretfulness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalāna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bleating, wailing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bawl, bleat, squeal, cry, caw, yelp, wail, scream; such noises.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian crow (Corvus tropicus), named for its caw; endangered [extinct in the wild].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a style of chanting with open mouth vibration and tremor of the voice, and prolonged vowels; to chant thus
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gargle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalalī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp shrill yelp, sudden screech; to yelp, screech.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>protection, defense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalamea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ripe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalamea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>precious, as a child
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalamea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalamihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a common black crab (Metopograpsus thukuhar).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalamoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fresh-water ʻoʻopu fish (Len tipes concolor). Hilo. Also hiʻu ʻula, hiʻu kole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaneo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• clear, unclouded,clearness,
   • calm, serene,  stillness;
   • free from impediment;   
   • emptiness, nothing; desolate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaneo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of a single color or texture, especially of a feather cloak without design and made of feathers of a single kind and color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaneo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swelling disease, dropsy, generalized edema, kidney disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaneo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a class of 12 male supernatural beings called papa pae māhū, said to be hermaphrodite healers from Kahiki. One at least was according to legend turned to stone and has been moved to Kuhiō Park, Waīkīkī, Oʻahu. see Paemāhū (in Pukui, Elbert and Mookini, 1974).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalani Pākē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tangerine, mandarin (Citrus reticulata cv. ‘deliciosa’), a small tree with small leaves and small, loose-skinned, orange, flattened globose, sweet fruits. lit., Chinese orange. On Niʻihau, identified as C. grandis; cf. (Neal 481).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalani ʻawaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calamondin (Citris mitis), a small tree with flattened-globose fruits to 2.6 cm in diameter, orange-colored, few-seeded, sour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaopuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, growing wild, also cultivated dry in Puna, Hawaiʻi; fragrant when cooked, like kāī.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalapahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slander, falsehood, deceit; slanderer; to slander, defame, deceive, lie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalapaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alpaca.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalapaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alabaster, ointment vase of alabaster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalapapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alfalfa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalapia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a heavy cloth resembling serge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalapuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, young, of creatures.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalauahio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>endemic Hawaiian honey creepers (Loxops maculata), 
   • Oʻahu creeper (L. m. maculata), endangered; 
   • Lānaʻi creeper (L. m. montana), presumed extinct; 
   • Maui creeper (L. m. newtoni); 
   • Hawaiʻi creeper (L. m. mana), endangered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glance, look quickly; glance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻala wai nui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all species of Peperomia, small native succulent forest herbs, related to ʻawa. The name is qualified by the terms kāne (on Oʻahu) or kupa liʻi (on Hawaiʻi), pehu, pōhina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻala wai nui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small weedy herb (Plectranthus parviflorus), in the mint family. This name may be qualified by the terms pua kī, wahine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• ink sac in octopus or squid; 
   • after salting, drying, and broiling on the fire, it is mixed with ʻinamona or chili peppers and eaten;    • mixed with ʻauhuhu juice it is used as bait. 
   • fig., useless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scar of a scrofulous sore; to be so scarred; perhaps tuberculosis adenitis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aerial tubers of bitter yam, hoi (Dioscorea bulbifera).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small ʻalā stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an edible crab of the Portunus sp., sandcolored, and found in shallow water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gentle, as a breeze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>various species of squirrelfishes of the family Holocentridae, including Flammeo sammara (spotfin squirrelfish, 185 mm), Adioryx lacteoguttatus (whitespotted, 117 mm), A. diadema, (crown, 109 mm), A. xanterythrus (Hawaiian, 132 mm), A. tiers (Tahitian, 259 mm). The young are called ʻaʻalaʻihi. Unidentified kinds are qualified by the terms ākoʻakoʻa, kala loa or kanaloa, lā kea, māhū, maoli, and pilikoʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pale pink tapa; any faded color
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane named for the fish, either a deep-red mutant of ʻāwela or related to it; internodes barrel-shaped, leaves purple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalaʻuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• homely, homeliness,
   • vile, vileness, 
   • slovenly, 
   • worthless;  
   • dregs of society.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro, said to be pungent-smelling when cooked. Varieties are qualified by the terms ʻeleʻele, keʻokeʻo, ʻōpelu; cf. also ʻalaopuna.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻale kua loloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long-backed billow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻale kuakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whitecaps, white spray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻale kūpīpī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dashing billow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻale olowalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>billows that follow one after the other.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>area.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snare, noose; to snare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaleka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large tree of the pine family, cedar, fir. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalekanika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arsenic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalekea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaleko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alto.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalekohola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alcohol.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalekuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>algum tree. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalelele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to skip, jump, fly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalemanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>almanac, calendar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalemone</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>almond (Prunus dulcis), hazel tree (KJV), almond (RSV) (Kin. 30.37) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alpha.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalepapeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alphabet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet-voiced.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaleʻaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a swamping wave, as one striking a canoe broadside from prow to stern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaleʻale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of ʻale₁, wave, crest of a wave, billow; to ripple, form waves, stir...;
   • stirring, moving, undulating, tossing, rippling, 
   • full to the brim.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaleʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tower, high lookout, gazebo; towering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• wave, crest of a wave, billow; 
   • to ripple, form waves, stir; rippling, stirring. 
   • to well, as tears in the eyes;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻale₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>are, a unit of measure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihi kēpau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower cord in a net to which lead sinkers were attached.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihi pāʻū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>line for lashing down the pāʻū mat covering of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihi pīkoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upper cord in a net to which floats were attached.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihi pōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower cord in a net to which stone sinkers were attached.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihikaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general, commander in battle, strategist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihikaua nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commander in chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihilele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dragnet, mullet net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cords or fine ropes threaded through marginal meshes of upper and lower edges of nets, to which were attached floats and sinkers; loops at the top of a kōkō net holding a calabash. see below and ʻupena ʻalihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horizon (sometimes qualified by lani or moana). cf. lihi, edge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deceit, trickery; to deceive, cheat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalikekoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alligator.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>five (especially in counting in a series); five times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalimakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arithmetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻali₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scar, depression, groove, imbedded mark. Also ʻeli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaloe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aloe, any plant of the genus Aloe; also the pānini ʻawaʻawa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shine, glitter, sparkle; bright, brilliant; splendor, brilliancy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalohi lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brightness of heaven, a term applied to the heavenly courts of the goddesses Uli and Kapo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalokio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alodial title, alodium, fee simple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaloma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aroma.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalopalopā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shiftless, dependent on others for a livelihood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalopeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fox.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaloʻalo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to dodge rapidly or continuously; 
   • to look about slyly; 
   • evasive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaloʻalo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lumpy, as poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaloʻalo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of small inshore fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to be with, share an experience, 
   • come near, 
   • go with, attend, escort, accompany, 
   • endure,
   • resist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• depression, gutter, ravine; 
   • lines of the hand, 
   • loose skin over the eyeball; 
   • tuck in a garment, shirring, ruffling; to ruff, as a mat.
   • descent, as of trail or road; 
   • of low rank (Kep. 125); 
   • to bend, duck, stoop; 
   • hang, sag, slacken, 
   • to relax;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two, twice. Pōʻalua, Tuesday; lit., second day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaluheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loose, as a bundle not securely tied; flabby, ill-fitting, loose-jointed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaluʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• loose, flabby; misshapen, as a premature baby; 
   • slack, as a rope; 
   • to sag; 
   • wrinkled, uneven, rough, lined; 
   • foetus; 
   • skin, rind, peel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dense waterworn volcanic stone, as used for poi pounders, adzes, hula stones; hard lava, basalt. Kinds of ʻalā rock, as used for adzes, are qualified by the phrases pia maka hinu, shiny-faced arrowroot; māhinu, shiny; and maka hinu, shiny face. also (Kam. 76:122) ʻalā haumeku ʻolokele, ʻalā lelekepue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalā mea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard volcanic stone, used for adzes
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalā poʻo malu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a dark basalt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>marshy; marsh, swamp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻalīlea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the common turbo shell (Turbo sandwicensis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamakihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a group of small endemic Hawaiian honey creepers, Loxops virens; abundant on Hawaiʻi (L. v. v.), Maui (L. v. wilsoni), and Kauaʻi, uncommon on Oʻahu (L. v. chloris) and Molokaʻi, rare on Lānaʻi. The feathers are yellow and greenish, and were formerly used in feather capes. The Kauaʻi form was also called alawī kihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamaʻama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mullet (Mugil cephalus), a very choice indigenous fish. Stages are (finger length) pua ʻama, pua ʻamaʻama, pua poʻolā, ʻoʻolā; (hand length) kahaha (or pahaha); (20 cm) ʻamaʻama; (30 cm or more) ʻanae. fig., an easy mark (modern slang).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamaʻumaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young ʻamaʻu ferns; many ʻamaʻu ferns, ferny, abounding in ʻamaʻu ferns; a covering of ʻamaʻu ferns (preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamaʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all species of an endemic genus of ferns (Sadleria), with trunk more or less evident. The fronds are narrower, smaller, and less divided than those of the hāpuʻu. At least one species has at the top of the trunk a mass of soft scales (pulu) used as pillow stuffing. Formerly, in times of famine, the tasteless pith of the trunk was cooked and eaten. The fronds were used to mulch dry-land taro, the stems for plaiting and as sizing for tapa. The ʻamaʻu was one of the forms that Kamapuaʻa, the pig god, could take at will. Also maʻumaʻu, maʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamaʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where ʻamaʻu₁ ferns are found.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>talkative, prattling, tattling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light, bright.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻama₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young ʻamaʻama fish, usually called pua ʻama.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻameki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amethyst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamekukeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amethyst. (Puk. 28.19)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amen; to say amen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamepela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exaggerated and rapid revolving of the hips in the hula; to do so.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami hoʻokuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joint. lit., connecting joint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami hoʻokuʻina lewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ball-and-socket joint. lit., swinging connecting joint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an amphipod (Caprellid amphipods) that clings to seaweeds or hydroids; it has a long slender body and is the color of the seaweed or hydroid on which it feeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami kuʻupau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very rapid revolution of the hips in the hula; an uninhibited (kuʻupau) ʻami; to do so.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami kāhela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hula step; hip rotations with weight on the right hip as the left heel lifts very slightly, then reversing; to do this ʻami.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami kūkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hula step with ʻami; like the ʻami kāhela except that the revolutions are smaller and faster and in groups of three; sometimes two slower kāhela revolutions are followed by three faster kūkū revolutions; to perform this step.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻami kāhela but a new term. lit., round ʻami.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami puka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hinge of door or gate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami ʻōpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ʻami hula step with abdomen thrust forward, considered in poor taste; to do this step. lit. stomach ʻami.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamiʻami</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• elastic, pendulous, springy; 
   • jerking of the hips back and forth in a crude or vulgar ʻami hula;    • motion of sexual intercourse; 
   • to move on hinges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamiʻōniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the figure-eight hula step; the revolving hips (ʻami) form an eight, with weight shifting; to perform this step. lit., spinning ʻami.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hinge, joint; to turn on hinges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hula step with hip revolutions; to do this step. Three types are ʻami kāhela, ʻami kūkū, and ʻami ʻōniu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻami₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>measuring worm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamokiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stem of fruits or tubers; small end of sweet potato tuber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamokiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>genitals of male.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amomum, a genus of plants in the ginger family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamonia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ammonia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamopuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, emaciated, lean. lit., protruding anal opening.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wink, sparkle; to wink, sparkle, glimmer, twinkle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>contraction of the anal muscles, anal opening, vagina. cf. pī ka ʻamo under pī₂.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻamumū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dull, blunt; dullness, bluntness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻana ʻalaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red pumice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻana ʻōlaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white pumice with fine pores.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full-sized ʻamaʻama mullet fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deformed, disfigured, stoop-shouldered, lopsided; such a person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gekko (RSV); polecat, ferret (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanakeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bent, crooked, misshapen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanakia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anarchy, anarchist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanakoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nothing remains to be done.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanakomia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anatomy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanakoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inflammatory swelling of a lymph gland, venereal tumor, bubo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanakā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anchor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanaliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wee, stunted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanaliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Asplenium lobulatum) with narrow fronds to 45 cm long, having many narrow lobes along two opposite sides of the axis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻananalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of hīnālea fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻananuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to collapse or deflate, as a balloon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shine, gleam, glitter, flash, sparkle; brightness, gleam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanapau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap, frisk, frolic; frisky. [Now heard only in the song: He aha ka hana a ʻAnapau (mele maʻi for Queen Liliʻuokalani)? What does Frisky do?]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanapuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bumpy, lumpy, jagged, uneven; bump, hump; to hump along, buck; to project, as the bones of a thin animal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to move with a jerky motion; 
   • to go gadding from place to place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanau hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go here and there, gad.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanaʻana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pellet-shaped, as goat dung.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanaʻana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shiver, tremble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pumice, used as a rubber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>siliceous sponge (Leiodermatium), used as medicine and as sandpaper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanekelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>angle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanekelopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>antelope; gazelle (RSV), roebuck (KJV)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaneko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dill (RSV), anise (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanemoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>peninsula. lit., near island (perhaps a translation of French presqu'île).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaneʻane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nearly, almost, scarcely, hardly, not quite, fairly; near.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaneʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>doubtful (used idiomatically).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻane₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to draw near.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanianiau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small, bright olive or yellowish-green Hawaiian honey creeper (Loxops [formerly Chlorodrepanis] parva), endemic to Kauaʻi, and related to the ʻamakihi. The young birds which are confused with young ʻamakihi, were reported to have been called alawī. The greater ʻamakihi (L. satittirostris) is presumed extinct.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanikelikeko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>antichrist. Also shortened to ʻanekaliko.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dwarfish, stunded, tiny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to vary, as great and small waves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanini₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>awning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano akua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>godlike, divine; godly form.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>method, case, technique, as in solving problems.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano hou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>new variety, fashion, or kind; new, unusual.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano hui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>compound, as of fractions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano huikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>complex, as of fractions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of heavenly or royal character, celestial, noble, royal, pure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resembling, of similar nature or type; resemblance, similarity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>property, as of a number; fraction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻano ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insignificant, trivial, of no consequence, unattractive; nonsense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanoʻai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greeting, salutation, news; to greet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanoʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unexpected.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanoʻai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perhaps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>desire, longing, love, desired one, lover; to desire, yearn; loved, beloved.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caterpillar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>annuity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heap, mass, pile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu hapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>half-step in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu hapa a me nā ʻanuʻu maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an augmented second in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full step in music.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stairs, jogs, steps, terrace, dais, ledge
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tower in ancient heiau, about 7 m high and 5.5 m square, as enclosed with white ʻōloa tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sprain, strain, disjointed vertebra; 
   • to stumble, trip, sprain; 
   • to land heavily or jar, as when one steps down but there is no step; jarred. 
   • fig., error, slip; to err.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a step between two notes on a musical staff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanuʻu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noun indicating comparison of adjectives.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻanāʻanā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black magic, evil sorcery by means of prayer and incantation; to practice this.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻao kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one remaining leaf (ʻao) on an old taro stalk, said of an old taro about to die.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻao lūʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unexpanded leaf blade of taro; to offer as a sacrifice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small shellfish (Melampus castaneus), strung in leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for sacrificial places near fishponds where semiannual offerings were made, as of taro, bananas, mullet, kohekohe sedge, and black pigs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>six, especially in counting in a series; six times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao hoʻomaʻemaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reform party.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao kālaiʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>political party.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao kūpale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>defense, as in a trial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao kūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perpendicular, of a triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao kūʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opposition, opponent, as in a trial; minority party.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao leo nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hypotenuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao makani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>windward side.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao mau o ka honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>death, afterlife. lit., everlasting side of the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>base, as of a triangle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of the kūpīpī fish, or alternate name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao ʻaiʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>debit side (in bookkeeping).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao ʻakau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>right or leeward side of air island.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻaowela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a green fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>group, team, denomination; party (political).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>way (Sol. 6.6) , habit, mode of living, education.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaoʻao₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>family gods, ʻaumākua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a new shoot, leaf, or bud, especially of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dried baked taro or sweet potato; in Kaʻū this food was hung in baskets in the wind so that it dehydrated; it was used on sea journeys and is perhaps related to ō, sea rations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ship biscuit, pilot bread, hardtack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapakau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to seize, lay hold of, 
   • disarrange, displace; 
   • to spread, as sunlight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapakeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deceit, dishonesty: deceitful, corrupt, inaccurate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapapane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian honey creeper (Himatione sanguinea), with crimson body and black wings and tail, found on all the main Hawaiian Islands. Its feathers occasionally were used for featherwork.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapaʻapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to procrastinate, deliberate, slow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapaʻapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>guile, deceit; to practice such. (Roma 1.25) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to delay, waste time, tarry, linger, keep others waiting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ephah. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻape</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large taro-like plants (Alocasia macrorrhiza, Xanthosoma robustum). A number of beliefs concerning ʻape have been recorded. ʻape was planted by a gate or fence because the irritating sap of the leaves was thought to ward off evil spirits; leaves were placed under tapas or mats on which the sick lay for the same reason. ʻape was not planted near the house for fear the residents might become sick. Varieties are qualified by the colors kea or keʻokeʻo (white), or hiwa or ʻeleʻele (dark).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapelekoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apricot (Prunus armeniaca).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapeʻape₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all endemic species of Gunnera, huge leafed forest perennial herbs, with thick, prostrate stems rising at the tip to about 120 cm.  Called hāhā on Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapeʻape₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elastic, flexible, limber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapeʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of tapa, wrapped about images.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapiʻapi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elastic, springy; short of breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapiʻapi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>filled, as a basket; abundant, as a feast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft spot in the temples; soft part of the human body between the pelvic cone and the lowest rib; under part of an animal's body (sometimes preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a surgeonfish (Acanthurus guttatus), 20 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish gills; to breathe through gills.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to palpitate, throb, tremble, shake, quiver; to beat, as the pulse; to stir, as waves; palpitation, quivering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a decoy stick basket with a wide opening; it was baited, and after the fish were accustomed to coming for food, a trap was substituted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather together, as people or things.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapo leo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to record a voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapo leo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>magical voice snatching (a sorcerer was believed able to snatch a victim's voice so that he could not chant or sing); to snatch a voice thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapokaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apostate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapokekolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apostle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapokolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apostle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapowai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of Hawaiian dog with solid grayish-brown body and nose tip and eyes of the same color, believed to love water and consequently offered as a sacrifice to moʻo water spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapowai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be a grayish-brown color, as a horse, perhaps bay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapowale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of wet-land taro grown chiefly for poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapoʻapo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• catching, grasping; 
   • attack, fit, heart palpitation, agitation; to have an attack, fit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapoʻapo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>half-grown stage of the āhole, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to catch, grasp, seize and retain,
   • grab, 
   • hug, 
   • acceptance, admission. 
   • fig., to perceive, understand.
cf:
     ʻaʻapo, to learn quickly, to catch the meaning quickly, apt...
     ʻapoa, pas/imp, to catch, grasp, grab...
     ʻapoʻapo,  catching, grasping...
     ʻāpō (var) to rebound, in basketball
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapu kōheoheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deadly poison, as given to prisoners.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapu ʻauhuhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cup containing ʻauhuhu plant concoction used for stupefying fish; poison cup.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapuhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deceive, lie, cheat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapuwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro: its corm is used for poi and table taro, its leaves for lūʻau. Varieties are white (kea) and red (ʻula).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapuʻapu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cup-shaped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapuʻapu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of agricultural land, as for sweet potatoes, mentioned in 1848 land claims, perhaps a pocket-like area.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fern (Sadleria squarrosa), 30 to 60 cm high, with short trunk, narrow oblong leaves; related to ʻamaʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hill, mound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• coconut shell cup; 
   • to drink. [kava]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for medical potions, as made of taro, yam, or herbs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻapu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a taro cultivar, perhaps related to the ʻapuwai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stalk of a hau tree, 
   • spear made of hau wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau hulaʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swim around a hulaʻana, or precipice facing the sea; course or route for swimming here.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau kolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crawl (swimming); to swim thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau koʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>axe handle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stem of a ti plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tread water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swim evenly or abreast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau lima₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bone of arm below elbow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau lima₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick held in the hand and rubbed in the fire-plow to produce fire by friction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fleet of ships.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau umauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breast stroke (swimming); to swim thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe fleet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leg bone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pole or stick used for carrying burdens across the shoulders; yoke, palanquin, burden; to carry on the ʻauamo. lit., carrying handle. Also ʻaumaka and māmaka.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wander, drift, ramble, go from place to place; to stray morally or mentally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lean, as fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cawing, as of the ʻalalā, crow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spindle-legged; spindleshanks; an animal with slender legs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhau Pōʻalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Tuesday tax, a term used in 1852, probably an educational tax.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhau maʻule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>misplaced or concealed noʻa stone in the game of pūhenehene.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhaupuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beggar; to go from door to door asking for charity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tax, assessment, levy, charge, tariff, toll, tribute, price; to levy a tax, pay tribute, tax.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>femur and humerus bones of the human skeleton.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stems of plants whose bark can be stripped, such as wauke and olonā, but not maile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhea hoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Where indeed (with implication of neglect or indifference)? Where's the interest? Where's the care?
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>listen (in commands, common in songs).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sir [formal beginning of a letter].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to flee from danger; 
   • routed, dispersed, defeated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauhuhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a slender, shrubby legume (Tephrosia purpurea syn. T. piscatoria), 30 to 60 cm high, with small, compound leaves, small white or purplish flowers, and narrow pods, used for poisoning fish. The plant is known from tropical Asia eastward into Polynesia.  Also ʻauhola, hola.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauialo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>accusative case. lit.., front case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauihea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vocative case. lit.., calling case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauihele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>case denoting separation, as shown by mai, from, ablative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauihui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>case denoting association. lit.., joined case; ablative (PHG).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauiiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>genitive or possessive case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauikumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nominative case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauikōhaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>possessive case. lit.., case belonging to someone else.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauimoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>locative case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bending, sloping; descent, slope.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauinapō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>midnight, late night.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauipaʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dative case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauipili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>possessive case; genitive (PHG).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauiʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agentive case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to turn aside, digress, deviate, 
   • pass by, 
   • decline, 
   • bend down.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to swell and roll, as the sea; to pitch; billow, roller.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaui₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>declension, case; to name declensions or conjugations (term devised by Andrews based on Latin declinare, to turn aside); never used extensively and not entered in (Hitchcock).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaui₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hula step: the dancer turns to the side and points out one foot once or several times, drawing the foot well back between each pointing; at the same time the body is tipped, with a lowered hand pointing to the outpointing toes, and the other hand raised in the opposite direction; to dance thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>out (in games).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to travel or swim by sea; seafaring; sailor, seafarer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukoʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coffee senna (Cassia occidentalis), a tropical American shrubby legume, each leaf with eight to ten leaflets, and with yellow flowers and narrow, many-seeded pods. Used medicinally for ringworm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuʻu kāhili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ʻaukuʻu heron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuʻu pili ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given by Kepelino for a bird resembling the kioea, and not an ʻaukuʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black-crowned night heron (Nycticorax nycticorax hoactli), a non-migratory land bird, which feeds on small fish and the larvae of insects in water. See sayings, heron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of fishhook with a long slender shaft, perhaps named for its resemblance to the heron's neck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long bamboo pole with two maile stalks across the top that were gummed with lime to catch birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuʻu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to vomit, retch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukuʻu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cords held by the fishermen (hoʻāu) who managed the net in kuʻu fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukā kopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bar of soap. lit.., bar soap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bar, as of soap or gold, 
   • nugget; 
   • ridge or strip between the flutes of a column, 
   • facet, 
   • fillet, 
   • capstan bar, 
   • bar across a roadway; 
   • stump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long stems, as of some species of mangoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wood woven through sticks in ʻie kala fish trap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaukā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stools, feces.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaulama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to light with a torch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaulani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>messenger of a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leaves strung on lines at ends of seines, as ti leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaulena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of native banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dainty, neat, trim, cute, exquisite, nice, perfect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small staff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaumakiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaumakua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to offer grace to ʻaumākua before eating; to bless in the name of ʻaumākua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaumakua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ask someone to hula; the request was not refused without giving the caller a lei or flower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaumoana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to travel on the open sea; sailor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaumoana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of laws enacted by Queen Kaʻahumanu, so called in commemoration of her attempt to commit suicide by swimming out to sea. She was saved by a child who swam after her and refused to leave her. She returned to shore rather than cause his death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaumoana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nautilus. usually called ʻauwaʻalālua, moamoa, moamoa waʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaunaki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick rubbed in obtaining fire by friction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaunaki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ounce.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaupapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>everything, as of things taken or lost; destitute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaepahāha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mumps. lit., puffed chin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaepaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>firmly opposed, set against. lit., firm chin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaepili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>close relative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaepuʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indifference to work, discouraged. lit., chin lump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaepuʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to squat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaeʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tribute of the best selected (wae) hogs or fruits of the land to the landlord; to inspect land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chin. fig., indifferent, scornful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>curved notch cut on the outer side of a post below the base of a tenon, also called maʻi wahine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portion of the point of a pearl-shell lure which overhangs the shank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• ditch, furrow, trench, gutter, 
   • canal, channel; 
   • groove, as in a tapa beater; 
   • to notch, as tops of house posts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outhouse, as for storing canoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ditch, canal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwai papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flume.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwai paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conduit, solid ditch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauwiniwini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp end of a leaf; term of raillery applied to men, referring to the male member.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauʻaukī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young eel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauʻaukī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish said to resemble weke (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauʻauwaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>furrowed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauʻau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stick, stem (as of ti plant); 
   • spear made of loulu palm, with shark teeth on its end; 
   • extra ridgepole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauʻau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trap, snare, as for catching birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stingy, selfish, stinginess; 
   • to withhold, grudge, refuse to part with; 
   • to detain, 
   • sparingly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻauʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of ʻōpelu fish said to be larger than others in a school and hence more visible. When net fishermen see an ʻauʻa they know a school is present; the ʻauʻa then can not be caught [he refuses].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jut out into the sea, as a land point; to project.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• handle, 
   • staff, shaft; 
   • stem, stalk, 
   • bone of lower arm or leg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>group (followed by a qualifier, as moku, waʻa.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa hiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with long internodes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably same as ʻawa papa kea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a young kava plant (root, stem, and leaves) used as an offering to the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa maha kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for ʻawa ākea, ʻawa mākea at Kaʻū, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa mamaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with short internodes and light-green stalk, reported at Wainiha, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa mokihana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with short yellowish-green internodes and hairlike roots, named for the mokihana plant because of its fragrance, and yielding a strong brew; famous on Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa mākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa mānienie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with smooth, white stalk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa mōʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with short, dark-green internodes and whitish nodes, called ʻawa papa mōʻī at Kaʻū, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa nēnē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with long, spotted internodes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with short internodes and spotted stalk. This name may be qualified by the terms ʻeleʻele, mōʻī, and kea (or keʻokeʻo), the last being the commonest variety, and whitish in general appearance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa ākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with long, light-green internodes and reddish nodes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa ʻapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawaakāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>it is said that the god Kāne brought the first ʻawa to Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ingratitude, meanness; to be mean, ungrateful, embittered, resentful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawaikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kava root dug ceremonially by a priest and held up (kū) towards heaven while chanting a prayer of consecration and eulogy, after which the root was termed ʻawailani.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawaiāhiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swelling in the groin, bubo; to have such a swelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawakupoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>avoirdupois.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawakūmakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava with green internodes of medium length.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of hard stone from which adzes were made.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eight (usually in counting in a series).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi Pākē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ginger (Zingiber officinale), yielding a valuable commercial root spice. The plant looks much like ʻawapuhi kuahiwi and probably comes from southeast Asia.  lit., Chinese ginger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the white ginger (Hedychium coronarium), a large herb from India, both wild and cultivated in Hawaiʻi. White fragrant flowers, popular for leis and perfume, are borne in heads at tips of leafy stems.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi koʻokoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>torch ginger (Phaeomeria speciosa), a large herb, from the East Indies, grown in Hawaiʻi for its ornamental pink or red cone-shaped flower heads. These are borne on long stems separate from the longer leafy stems.  lit., walking-stick ginger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild ginger
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi luheluhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the shell ginger (Catimbium speciosum), a large ornamental herb from East Indies. Clusters of irregularly bell-shaped flowers that are white and marked with red and yellow bend downward from the top of leafy, arching stems, which are 1.5 to 3.5 m high. lit., drooping ginger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi melemele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the yellow ginger (Hedychium flavescens), similar to ʻawapuhi keʻokeʻo and similarly used, but the flowers are yellow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., edible ginger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the red ginger (Alpinia purpurata), an ornamental plant having a long flower spike with many red bracts. It is a native of some islands of the western Pacific.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhiakanaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Liparis hawaiensis, a small, endemic orchid with two large ovate leaves and small flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawapuhi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of taro (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawawaiakamanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of kava, an offshoot of ʻawa hiwa, with joints green on one side and dark on the other.  lit., watery kava of the bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawaʻawahua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bitter, sour. fig., crabbed in nature, bitter, ungrateful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawaʻawaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bitterness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawaʻawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bitter, sour, tart, acid, fermented, brackish; bitterness, sourness. 
   • fig., unpleasant, disagreeable, harsh, bad-tempered; 
   • unpleasant or tragic experience, 
   • anguish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the kava (Piper methysticum), a shrub 1.2 to 3.5 m tall with green jointed stems and heart-shaped leaves, native to Pacific islands, the root being the source of a narcotic drink of the same name used in ceremonies (Neal 291), prepared formerly by chewing, later by pounding. The comminuted particles were mixed with water and strained, When drunk to excess it caused drowsiness and, rarely, scaliness of the skin and bloodshot eyes. Kava was also used medicinally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sour, bitter, poisonous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cold mountain rain, fog, mist; to rain or mist. fig., tragic misfortune or ordeal; in (PH) this word is preceded by ke and may refer to volcanic eruption:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a premature infant, believed caused by a "sour" condition of the mother.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of bitter seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawe puhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eel tentacle, but referring to the octopus, a euphemism for ʻaweule.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaweka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hide rather than share wealth (perhaps related to weka, squid ink).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>average, pro rata. divided equally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaweule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lone octopus tentacle, said to wave in order to entice and ensnare a victim. lit., penis tentacle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaweʻawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• pack, knapsack; [NB: 1986 editions omit comma after "pack" where earlier editions include it.]
   • straps for a bundle; 
   • strips, as of wauke; runners, as on a vine; 
   • tentacles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pack, knapsack carried on the back; to carry on the back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻawe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tentacle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothlike sheath at base of coconut frond; European cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut-leaf or pandanus-leaf bag used for carrying birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa moni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>purse. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothlike sheath at base of coconut frond.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arrow case, quiver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bag for carrying fire-making equipment (ʻaʻa, bag, and ahi, fire).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>second or third crop, as of taro; taro patch where the taro has been pulled up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the sound ay that infants make in calling for attention; to make this sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>netted carrier for a calabash, made of sennit or olonā cord. More commonly called kōkō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatch purlin; rails, as in a fence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container, as for pia, arrowroot starch; to put pia in small packages so that it may keep sweet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• clothing in general, garment, array, attire, costume, mantle, gown; 
   • to put on or wear clothing, especially shirt, suit, or coat; 
   • to cover or wrap, as the body with a blanket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahu a poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head shield; protection for the head in war, as helmet, shield.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahu aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>regal attire, a royal robe, a type of colored tapa worn by people of rank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahu kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armor, war garment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahu makaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long malo or ornamented band made of the soft makaloa rush; to put on or wear this garment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahu pāwehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>garment made of pāwehe, patterned mat; mat made of soft material and woven in the pāwehe pattern; to put on and wear this garment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahu ʻoihana piha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full regalia, dress uniform. Lit., full professional garment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tendon. lit., pulled vein.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻahuā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to speak reproachfully, contemptuously, deride, jeer; jealous challenge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>demented.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inferior, weak, said of breadfruit or fruit with a weak stem that may fall before maturity; weak object. (Kep. 93) fig., of persons dying before their time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaiʻanuheakāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legendary bird. Lit., caterpillar eater of Kāne.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• eating, spreading, festering, increasing, as a sore; 
   • ulcerous, cancerous, malignant; 
   • to eat away, corrode; 
   • to take bait readily, as fish; 
   • erosion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bright, vivid, as of contrasting colors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• surly, cranky, roiled, complaining, irritable, peevish, bad tempered, cantankerous, cross; 
   • severe, as labor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• dry, as coral of the reef at low tide; 
   • parched, 
   • wrinkled, 
   • dry and thirsty;
   • peeling off, as the tough skin of such fish as the humuhumu after it has been in the fire; 
   • to crackle, 
   • burst, as a ripe melon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rocky undersea cavern. (PH 219), (Malo 26).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wood of the naio, bastard sandalwood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of ʻaki₁, to take a nip and let go, snap...
   • to nip repeatedly; a bite, nibble. 
   • to take a nip and hold on (cf. nahu, to bite with the whole mouth, and nau, to chew); 
   • fig., thick, obscure, dark, penetrating; 
   • to feel pangs, as of love or childbirth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaki makau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hook nibbler, said of small fish that nibble away the bait; to nibble at a hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻako₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>repeated plucking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻako₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insatiable lust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻako₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to get into action.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a combination of diseases: liver complication resulting in hardening of the veins, bloody dysentery accompanied by fever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalaihau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (no data; perhaps a local name for one of the chaetodons).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalaioa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild, demented person; uncivilized.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalakai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insipid, unsavory, tasteless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalakai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, plump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalaʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of the ʻalaʻihi fishes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>velvety-green, succulent-appearing seaweeds, one of several species of Codium. It yields a red liquid when placed in a container overnight with brine, after chopping or pounding. Both the liquid and the seaweed are well liked, being eaten plain or with other food. (KL. line 47) ʻaʻalaʻula is the common name on Kauaʻi and Maui, wāwaeʻiole elsewhere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of ʻali₁; scarred, marked, grooved; depression, groove; wattles of a fowl; slight depression under the gills of a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scarred.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, fat, weak, as a fat person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native hardwood shrubs or trees (Dodonaea, all species), 30 cm to 10 m [1-33 ft] high, more or less sticky at branch tips; leaves narrow, 2 to 10 cm [¾"-4"] long; flowers small; fruit a yellow, red, or brown papery capsule about 1 cm long and with two to four wings. Fruit clusters are made into leis with their own leaves or ferns and worn in the hair. (Neal 536–7), (FS 57). symbol of independent people of Kaʻū. (Wight)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ravine, small stream, valley, depression.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻama₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large, black, edible crab (Grapsus grapsus tenuicrustatus) that runs over shore rocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻama₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread and relax, as the fingers. [The ʻaʻama crab was offered in sacrifices so that the gods would loosen (aʻama) and grant the request.]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻamoʻo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young clothlike sheath at base of coconut frond; gauze, as of a veil; diaphanous cloth. lit., ʻaʻa portion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻamoʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snakeskin; slime, as on fresh water. lit., lizard ʻaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to use abusive language, revile, malign.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻanema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to criticize maliciously; malign.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻano₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overbearing, arrogant, bold, defiant, daring; bully.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greedy, voracious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>uncultivated bananas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻapi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warped, curved.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to learn quickly, to catch the meaning quickly, apt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻapu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut-shell cup; cuplike.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻapu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to warp, bend, ruffle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move here and there, wander, rove; to ripple, as the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻawa hua kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native tree (Pittosporum hosmeri and its varieties), about 6 m high, with leaves 10 to 25 cm by 1.5 to 6 cm, shiny and wrinkled above, brown-wooly beneath; small, clustered, cream-colored flowers; ovoid fruits about 5 cm long, each with two to four thick valves containing orange pulp and black oily seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wrasse fishes, Hawaiian hogfish (Bodianus bilunulatus), considered ʻaumākua by some. The name ʻaʻawa may be qualified by the terms ʻeʻa, hai ʻeʻa, lelo, ule holu (pliable penis).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻawa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for an insect that destroys potatoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothlike sheath at base of coconut frond; vascular bundles in taro corm, chaff, tissue; fibrous, stringy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to brave, dare, challenge, defy (1-Sam. 17.10) , check, venture; to accept a challenge; 
   • bold, venturesome, valiant, intrepid.
   • to volunteer, involving a difficulty; 
   • to act wickedly or presumptuously (Kanl. 1.43) ;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>belt, girdle, waist; to gird, tie on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bag, 
   • pocket, 
   • caul, envelope for a foetus, 
   • scrip [archaic: bag or wallet carried by wayfarers] (1-Sam. 17.40) ; 
   • fiber from coconut husk; 
   • clothlike sheath at base of coconut frond; 
   • cloth; 
   • chaff, hull (Ier. 23.28) ; 
   • skin covering eyeballs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to step over, get on top of, tread upon, 
   • trespass; 
   • to get into by stepping up, as into a car; step. 
   • to raise; 
   • to massage the back with the feet; 
   • to break a taboo or violate a law; 
   • counter sorcery; to inflict sorcery on a sorcerer; 
   • fig., oppressed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻe kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a step, as on a carriage; running board of an automobile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine net, as used for ʻōpelu and maomao fish; it was held open at the mouth by kuku, stretching poles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crackling, snapping; an explosive sound, sharp report, bang (rare), loud prolonged sound, peal (less common than ʻuʻina).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Newell's puffin or shearwater (Puffinus puffinis newelli), said to be the only sea bird endemic to Hawaiʻi, and to breed only in Hawaiʻi; glossy black above, white beneath; endangered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻaʻole, not. See chant, wāhia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻā maka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stare or glare with wide-open eyes, as in desire, fear, or intent to frighten; one who does so.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻā pele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ʻaʻā lava or flow, volcanic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻā puʻupuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp or waterworn, coarse gravel or rock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to burn, blaze, glow;  fire;    • staring, as eyes.    • fig., angry; fury.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ʻaʻā lava; stony, abounding with ʻaʻā lava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaʻā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young stage of damselfish (ʻāloʻiloʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEhukai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind of Hālawa, Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind at Kona, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEkekemō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Eskimo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEkeloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEkeʻeke₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind of the island of Kaʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEkinapolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Edinburgh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEkuakola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Ecuador; Ecuadorian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEleʻū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dark-skinned people said to be descended from a chief of this name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻElie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Erie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEnekelea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>incarnation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEpekopala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Episcopal; Episcopalian.  Less common than Hoʻomana Pīhopa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEpipania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Epiphany.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEukalikia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Eucharist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEulopa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Europe; European.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEwa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place name west of Honolulu, used as a direction term.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEwa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Eve. fig., woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻEʻelokoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a storm from the northeast of Waimea, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻe-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prefix to numerals, inanimate, as ʻekahi, ʻelua, ʻekolu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea hanu paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>condition of frequent colds. lit., ʻea with hardened breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea huna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizzy spells, dizziness; latent ʻea disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea kai wawaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>impaired vision, perhaps labyrinthitis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea kua neneke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ʻea, a land tortoise. lit., tortoise with back fitted into sections.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea kākua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a disease, perhaps secondary lues; lumbago (EH).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea kāmolowā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>condition of listlessness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea kū manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>severe headaches, perhaps due to high blood pressure. lit., ʻea at fontanel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea kūkaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disease with swelling symptoms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea māhani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of ʻea [illness] described as evanescent [vanishing, fading way, fleeting].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea mālani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light-brown in color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea pōniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizziness, vertigo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea wawaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acute childhood ʻea disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea wāhi paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>osteomalacia, gradual softening of the bones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wine-colored, such a color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea ʻōlena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jaundice, hepatitis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeahoupo lewalewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>great hunger, perhaps due to diabetes. lit., loose-hanging diaphragm ʻea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeaʻea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spray; encrusted with spray (sometimes confused with eaea and ʻeʻaʻeʻa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeaʻea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dignified, honorable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeaʻea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• hawksbill turtle (Chelone imbricata), both land and sea species; 
   • the shell of this turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reddish-brown, as the color of the ʻea shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a general term for infections and infectious diseases; coated tongue, sometimes accompanied by sore throat, the thrush disease of children. Many diseases of miscellaneous nature begin with ʻea and are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vocative interj. usually at the beginning or end of utterances.  (1 Sam. 9.5) ,  (Lunk. 7.3) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻea₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noisy; to yell, whoop; whoop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeha wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>easily hurt, sensitive, having feelings easily hurt; to hurt for no reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Chinese lace-necked, or ring-necked dove (Streptopelia chinensis), an early introduction to Hawaiʻi, said to be named for its call ʻeha kō, prolonged pain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehaʻeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>great pain, agony, tribulation, many small pains; painful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeheheu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>somewhat crooked, warped; not in sound mind. (Similar to but perhaps less strong than hipa and hepa.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeho₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone pile (FS 107), especially as used to mark land boundaries; stone image; heap of stones under water (at times fishermen block one end with a net and drive the fish in from the other end), also umu, imu; pillar (Kin. 35.20) ; red-hot stones put inside dressed animals in cooking (also pōhaku ʻeho).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeho₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swelling or ulcerous sore, as caused by friction under the arm, tumor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu ahiahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the dust of evening. fig., twilight, old age.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu hīnano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hīnano-blossom pollen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea spray, foam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu kakahiaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the dust of morning. fig., dawn, youth, a shower that clears quickly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu kumu uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hair black at the roots that shades out to reddish at the tips, said to be characteristic of some ʻehu people.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust; dusty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flower pollen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spray from water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehuehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(this form was perhaps once ehuehu and is sometimes pronounced thus still).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehuʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻahuʻawa (Cyperus javanicus).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spray, foam, mist. (Many older people say ehu for ʻehu₁,₂,₃,₄, which is probably the older form; note lack of glottal stops in such forms as ehuehu, ʻehuehu, kaiehu, kēhu, kuehu, luehu, puehu.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust; dusty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pollen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faint, difficult to see; wisp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reddish tinge in hair, of Polynesians and not of Caucasians; one with ʻehu hair; reddish-brown complexion said to be characteristic of some ʻehu people; ruddy. (This ʻehu is invariably pronounced with an initial glottal stop.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻehē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hard, dry cough; to cough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>emphatic variation of eia: here! here it is!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekalekia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>church (the organization, not the building; usually pronounced ʻekalesia).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekaʻeka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian name for a Japanese variety of taro (adado) grown in Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, foul, fecal (Kam. 64:109); filth, dirt, soil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of bananas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acre.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>icecap [i.e. ice bag].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke hoʻopaʻa laho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male supporter, jockstrap. lit., basket supporting scrotum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke huluhulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gunny sack. lit., hairy sack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke kūkaenalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flour sack or sack of unbleached muslin (kūkaenalo), as formerly used for poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke leka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mail pouch, mailbag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke paʻa lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>handbag, hand basket, briefcase.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke wai wela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hot-water bag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekekeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekekeʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short, as a dress or fishline (probably a redup. of ʻeke₂ + -ʻi, transitivizer).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekeliuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ethereum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekemauʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gunny sack, burlap. lit., grass sack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>akimbo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekemu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to answer briefly, speak but little; taciturn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekepue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bend over, crouch, as to hide oneself or an object. fig., secretive, as in love affairs; to keep a secret.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekepuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekeʻeke kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>billfold, wallet, small purse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekeʻeke maʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>holder for stone in the sling (maʻa), sometimes a kind of woven basket, but in smaller slings merely a kind of noose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekeʻeke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small bag or sack, pocket, purse, scrotum
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekeʻeke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fussy, overexacting, cranky, particular.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekeʻeke₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a herringbone design, as in mat plaiting or in the pāpale ʻie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekeʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of banana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cringe, shrink from, draw away from, flinch, wince; to become smaller, shrink.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekiʻeki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian tern (Anous sp.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻakoko and koko, shrubs and trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to root, as a pig. paw up dirt, as a dog (NKE12). fig., prow of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekulēkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>digging place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekuʻeku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to soften the earth, as for planting. 
   • redup. of ʻeku, to root, as a pig. 
   • fig., prow of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bayonet. cf. kī, to shoot, and ʻēlau waikī.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻekī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where ti plants grow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻela kinika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ginger ale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻele hiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coal-black, jet-black, all black. See chant, ʻelemoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻele-₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old. see:
     ʻelehine, old woman. see luahine...
     ʻelekule, old fellow, old chap...
     ʻelemakule, old man...
     ʻelemākule, plural of ʻelemakule, old man...
     lāʻele, old leaf,... (a contraction of lau ʻelemakule); fig., aged; old age...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻele-₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prefix to names of directions used by priests; see:
     ʻelehonua, priests' name for west...
     ʻeleiāhonua, same as ʻelehonua, priests' name for west...
     ʻeleiālani, same as ʻelelani, priests' name for east...
     ʻelekū₄, priests' name for north...
     ʻelelani, priests' name for east...
     ʻelemoe₂, priests' name for south...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plant louse, aphid; germ, blight; blighted, as by ʻeleao. fig., troublemaker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fungus (Gnomania iliau), parasitic on leaf sheaths of sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>time of light, daylight, a term used in kuwā prayers, as to indicate that a new house is free from taboo and may be occupied.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>door at the leeward end of a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>period of darkness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perhaps same as ʻakiʻaki, a seaweed. Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleheʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mutilated, deprived of some essential part; mayhem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleheʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>angry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelehine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelehonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priests' name for west.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bear a grudge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelekule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old fellow, old chap. cf. the common ʻelemakule.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelekuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small crabs (Xanthidae spp.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelekū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coarse vesicular basalt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelekū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone polisher or rubber made of this rock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelekū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entirely black, coal-black, said jokingly of dark people, including Negroes. See chant, ʻelemoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelekū₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priests' name for north.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priests' name for east.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>messenger, delegate, ambassador, envoy, any diplomatic representative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelele waha ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>letter, written message. lit., messenger without mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cockroaches (Blattidae).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelū kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cockroach that has shed its skin and is light (kea) in color; a term of ridicule for an unclean white person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelū kīkēkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large American cockroach (Periplaneta americana). lit., knocking cockroach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelū laʻa loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cockroach, kitchen roach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelū lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>burrowing cockroach (Pycnoscelus indicus) lit., earth cockroach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelū papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cockroach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelelū ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, brown cockroaches, such as the American cockroach (Periplaneta americana), and the somewhat smaller Australasian cockroach (P. australasiae).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelemakaiāuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an expert taro farmer (no data). (For. 5:681).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelemihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻalamihi and ʻelepī, a small black crab.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelemika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hermit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelemio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelemio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to snatch without being seen, as by a thief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelemoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark, still, as sea or forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelemoe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priests' name for south.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelepaio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of flycatcher with subspecies on Hawaiʻi (Chasiempis sandwichensis sandwichensis), Kauaʻi (C. sandwichensis sclateri), and Oʻahu (C. sandwichensis gayi). The Kauaʻi subspecies is also called ʻāpekepeke. This bird was believed to be the goddess of canoe makers, hence the saying ua ʻelepaio ʻia ka waʻa, the canoe is [marked] by the ʻelepaio [an ʻelepaio bird pecking slowly on a tree trunk for insects signified that the trunk was insect-ridden and not suitable for a canoe (see kani₁); the saying may be applied to any failure]. The name also refers to one who craves fish but does not go fishing, as the cry of the bird was thought to suggest ʻono ka iʻa, ʻono ka iʻa, fish is delicious, fish is delicious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelepaio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro; the leaves are mottled with white.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelepani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elephant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelepani kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea elephant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelepī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻalamihi, ʻeleʻelepī, and ʻelemihi, a small black crab.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>darkness of rain or rain clouds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a new house before it has beem made noa, or free from taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>door on the weather end of a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleua₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancestor or aged male of a family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleua₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a major illness (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleuli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grayish black.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleuli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare type of dark-gray or perfumed tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelewawā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark and tumultuous, as sea or forest. See chant, ʻelemoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blue-black, shiny black. fig., select, choice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele kanikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black crepe worn for mourning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele mākoko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a taro cultivar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coal-black.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻelekū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unattractively dark and ugly, coal-black.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻelepī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agitated, turbulent, tumultuous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻeleu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vivacious, energetic, lively.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variety of tapa said to have originated at Kaumakani, Maui; it was dyed with candlenut, pāʻihi, and black mud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long, filamentous, green, edible seaweeds (Enteromorpha prolifera). Some kinds are among the most popular in Hawaiʻi, being eaten raw as condiments at feasts. Called pīpīlani on Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cooking banana (a form of Musa xparadisiaca), valued for shiny black skin of trunk, used for designs worked into pandanus mats and hats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as hinupuaʻa and naioea, varieties of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻele₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go after secretly and speedily; agile, spry; the name of a famous runner of Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeleʻū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hard stone, sometimes used as a fish god.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black (less used than ʻeleʻele). cf. also ʻeʻele, pāʻele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>embryo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water hole, dark spring covered with growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeli ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dig a trench so that rain water will run off.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeliʻeli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Redup. of ʻeli; 
   • to dig often.
   • fig., firmly rooted, profound, 
   • deep, as a taboo, or its removal; 
   • reverence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wet, soggy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemelala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>emerald.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemepaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>empire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemepake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>embassy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemepakekoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ambassador.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemepela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>emperor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>emir.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a waiting, delay; to wait, delay (often used with a negative).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemo ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>without delay, immediately, suddenly, in no time at all, quickly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻemoloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native grass (Eragrostis variabilis) 30 to 90 cm high, with long narrow flowering panicles, growing on open slopes and ridges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻena makani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stormy wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻena makani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>windmill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenakōī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break wind foully; such action. Probably lit., flowing abundance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenamela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>enamel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenaʻena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all species of cudweeds (Gnaphalium), members of the daisy family, small herbs having small inconspicuous flowers and more or less white woolly stems and leaves. Formerly Hawaiians stored feather standards, kāhili, with native species (G. sandwicensium and G. hawaiiense) to repel insects.  called pūheu on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• red-hot, glowing. 
   • fig., raging, angry; anger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shy; to shy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻena₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>abundance, plenty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻena₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opening in the clouds said to be like the jaw of the aʻu swordfish and a sign of rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenekini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>engine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenekinia kīwila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>civil engineer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenemi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>enemy; to feel enmity; to be an enemy. (Note that the Hawaiian stress is on the second syllable, contrasting with Eng. stress on the first syllable.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild, untamed, fearful of people, shy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenoʻeno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very wild, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenuhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caterpillar, as of hawk or sphinx moths (Sphingidae). fig., a rapacious person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻenuhe kilika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the introduced silkworm (Bombyx mori).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full of food, as a calabash (but not as full as pihaʻū).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to agree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻepaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ephphatha; let it be opened.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻepane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tricky, mischievous, 
   • dishonest; deceit; to deceive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ephah.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻepe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stanza.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻepikekole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>epistle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻepukane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spouse.  (Possibly French époux, husband, + kāne, male.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeuanelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Evangelist; evangelistic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeuanelio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Evangelical; gospel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeukalikia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eucalyptus tree.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeunuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eunuch. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeuʻeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exciting, rousing, alert, lively, animated, aroused.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• mischievous, naughty, playful, as a child; rogue, rascal, scamp; mischief; 
   • hoot of an owl ʻaumakua warning of imminent danger (also same as hōʻeu).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to crawl along; 
   • to rise, rising.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻewai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perhaps a var. of ʻauwai, ditch (noted in 1848 land claim, Hāmākua, Hawaiʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻewaʻewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irregular, biased, unequal, unjust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻewaʻewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sooty tern (Sterna fuscata oahuensis); forehead and sides of head white, rest of head black; upper parts black, white beneath. Also ʻewaʻewa iki.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• crooked, out of shape, 
   • imperfect, 
   • ill-fitting. 
   • fig., incorrect, unjust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeweʻewe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cry of ʻEweʻeweiki, a legendary woman who died in childbirth and who is said to return at night as a ghost and make this cry, which is followed by a nā cry like that of an infant, an omen that a birth is imminent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeāʻeā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>at end of verses in some chants that maintains rhythm and affords pleasure in repetition, something like English tra-la-la.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Isn't that so? That's it!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>song refrain. see (EM 81).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻaʻeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust; dusty; obscure, darkened, cloudy, shady; to cloud, overshadow (sometimes confused with eaea and ʻeaʻea).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust, dirt, dust cloud, spray (ʻeʻa and ʻea₄ are probably interchanged at times).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mountain banana patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish similar to ʻaʻawa, but with dark flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard, stiff, dry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quick ready, expert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird, said to be an adult ʻalaiaha.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻehia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• overcome with fearful reverence, terror-stricken, awe-stricken; 
   • awe-inspiring, solemn; 
   • reverence, awe, 
   • fear, terror; 
   • weird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reddish; a number of ʻehu persons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offensive, filthy, fly-ridden.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻekeloi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tap a drum slowly, as to accompany a chant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻeke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for a hard-shelled crab (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻelekoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stormy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻelekū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blackened or darkened, as leaves or fruit due to maturity or to pelting by storms; dark, gloomy, as clouds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻelo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drenched, soaked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻelo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loitering; to dilly-dally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• shy, timid, wary, afraid, to shy away.
   • wild, fearsome, untamed;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extraordinary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extraordinary, incomprehensible, abnormal, deceitful, peculiar, as persons with miraculous powers; such persons. Many ʻeʻepa characters in mythology were born in strange forms, as a plant, an animal, or a piece of rope. cf. ʻepa₁, ʻepaʻepa, kino ʻeʻepa. The Menehune, Nāwā, and Nāmū of Waolani in Nuʻuanu Valley were ʻeʻepa. Trickery or deceit that passes comprehension is also ʻeʻepa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻeu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crawl, creep, as an insect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻeu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shuddering sensation of revulsion (less strong than mania); to rise in horror, flinch (sometimes interpreted as a portent).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make a wry face, pout, as in derision; to protrude the lips mockingly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to keep climbing over everything, as an active child; mischievous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻeʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to creak, crackle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>if not for … would not have.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻeʻole … inā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>if not … would have.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• name of Jupiter appearing as the morning star; 
   • fig., dawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>valley and peak, West Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIkelaʻela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Israel. (For the Hawaiian glottal stop, cf. (Gram. 2.9.3))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIkuā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>month of the Hawaiian year, named, according to Kepelino, for the roar of surf, thunder, and cloudbursts of this month. Pohākōʻeleʻele is a var. name: see month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIlelani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Ireland; Irish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIlikini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Indian (of America).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIliʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIlokuoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Iroquois.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻImihau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a stormy wind at Lahaina, Maui. lit., dew seeker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻInia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>East Indian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻInia Hikina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>East Indies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIniana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Indian, as Indian Ocean.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIolani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the Palace and of a school in Honolulu; also the names of Kamehameha II and IV: see (PN). lit., royal hawk (the high flight of the hawk symbolized royalty).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIowa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Iowa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻIo₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably the name of a stroke in lua fighting; also a low stroke in club fighting
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiako₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>outrigger boom. arched crossbeams which fasten the floater (ama) to the hull of an outrigger canoe
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiako₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forty, as in counting tapas, canoes, or feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jump into water from a height, feet first, without causing a splash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>silversides (Pranesus insularum), a fish 5 to 8 cm long, in shallow pools, used as bait for such fish as aku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiao₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird said to resemble the moho (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie lawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fish-trap basket made of ʻie vine. lit., portable ʻie.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breadbasket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie ʻōpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wastebasket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>person of distinction, chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiewe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>afterbirth, placenta.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiewe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>infant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiewe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>relatives of a common ancestry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻieʻiea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barbed, as a hook; barb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻieʻie₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic woody, branching climber (Freycinetia arborea) growing luxuriantly in forests at altitudes of about 300 to 600 m. The ringed stems end in tufts of long, narrow, spiny leaves, in the center of which flowers are borne on cylindrical spikes surrounded by leafy bracts, which are orange or green with orange bases. (Neal 54) ʻIeʻie was one of five plants used on the hula altar (see palai).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻieʻie₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro with leaf blades and flowers suggesting ʻieʻie₁; the leaves are dark and glossy, the petioles reddish with yellow-green stripes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻieʻie₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>high, conceited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aerial root of the ʻieʻie vine; the vine itself.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a woven basket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a flat, plaited braid as used in hats; braided.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wicker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for fish traps, combined with the name of the fish, as ʻie kala, ʻie palani.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canvas, cotton, linen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻie₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corduroy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihaʻiha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• feeling of discomfort of one needing to relieve himself; 
   • tight, taut, tense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi kū ma kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weedy sorrel. (Oxalis sp.).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi kūkae hipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as kūkaehipa, spiny bur (Acanthospermum australe).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavenly splendor; sacredness of a chief; reverence due a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Marsilea villosa. lit., medicinal sorrel. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi mākole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a creeping variety of ʻihi with red stems (differing in this from ʻihi ʻawa), yellow flowers, and no bulbs; used medicinally. lit., red-eyed ʻihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi pehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of sorrel (Oxalis martiana) with large leaves, pink flowers, bulbous scaly root, used medicinally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi pua kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shamrock. lit., white-flowering Oxalis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of ʻihi (Oxalis corniculata). lit., edible ʻihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihiʻawaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>storm accompanied by much thunder and lightning, and an epithet for the gods of thunder and lightning. lit., stormy sacred ones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihiʻihiione</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a mustard plant, Coronopus didymus. Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihiʻihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>revered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihiʻihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an unknown plant formerly growing at ʻIhiʻihilauākea [ʻIhiʻihi-lau-ākea], the western side of Hanauma Bay, Oʻahu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred, holy, majestic, dignified; treated with reverence or respect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wood sorrels (Oxalis, all species), perennial weedy herbs, creeping or not, and bearing cloverlike leaves and yellow, white, red, or pink bell-shaped flowers. The plants have a pleasant sour taste due to oxalic acid. (Neal 473–4) Known to some as Portulaca spp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike hana lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skilled craftsman, craftsmanship; deft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike hānau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>instinct. lit., birth knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike kaʻa kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strategy, knowledge pertaining to war; to know the strategy of war.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike kumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>basic or fundamental knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike kūhohonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deep knowledge or insight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike lihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glimpse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to know very well indeed, knowledgeable, versed, wise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike mahuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to glimpse; inkling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike maka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eyewitness, witness as to a will, eyesight, visual knowledge; visible; to see or witness personally.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to see clearly; to know definitely; certain knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike pāpālua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to see double; to have the gift of second sight and commune with the spirits; supernatural knowledge, extrasensory perception.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻikena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>view, seeing, knowing, association, scenery, knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻikeoma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>idiom; idiomatic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻike₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of scorn in the phrase: I ka ʻike! What does [he, she] know!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻikuā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noisy, clamorous, loud-voiced; to make a din; din, clamor; voices of the gods in the elements.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻikuʻiku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stench; foul-smelling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻikāmū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gathering together, as of fish about a hook.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to do together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fiery surface.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili eʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>contagious skin disease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bark of the hau tree, as used for rope and for modern grass skirts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili hinuhinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>patent leather. lit., shiny leather.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili holoholona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leather; fur, as about the neck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surface of the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skin of kala, a fish, sometimes stretched over a coconut shell to form the top of the small pūniu, knee drum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kani₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a skin that sounds, as used in drums.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kani₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tough skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taboo against contact with clothing or bedding of others; one with such a taboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kauō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reins. lit., pulling strap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fair skin, of Hawaiians less dark than ʻilikou.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white kōnane pebble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili keʻehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stirrup.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark-skinned, as dark Hawaiians. lit., kou-wood skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kuapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>belt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili kūpono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a nearly independent ʻili land division within an ahupuaʻa, paying tribute to the ruling chief and not to the chief of the ahupuaʻa. Transfer of the ahupuaʻa from one chief to another did not include the ʻili kūpono located within its boundaries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili lele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>portion of an ʻili land division separated from the main part of the ʻili but considered a part of it.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>new skin, as over a sore; new bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili luna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>epidermis; outer bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tree bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili mākuʻakuʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark-red bark, especially of koa trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili mākuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark-skinned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili mānoanoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>callus, calloused skin, thick leather; calloused.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili omo wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suction tube.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili pakalua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thick, coarse, or wrinkled skin or bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili pala uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark-complexioned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili palapala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>parchment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili pale o kāmaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sole of shoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ʻili land division complete in one section, as distinguished from an ʻili lele.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili pilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smelly skin, said approvingly of industrious farmers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leather, cowhide.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scalp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili poʻopoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>concave surface; hollow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili pāpaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sunburned or tanned skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili wahī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scabbard, sheath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skin not easily bruised or infected; one with such a skin is said to emit an acrid (ʻawa) odor; a strong-smelling fish caught by him (as pualu or palani) is said to become more offensive in odor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili ʻaʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a skin or complexion prone to infection. lit., corrosive skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black kōnane stone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili ʻāina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land area.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili ʻāina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ʻili land division whose chief pays tribute to the chief of the ahupuaʻa of which it is a part, rather than directly to the king.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili ʻōmaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foreskin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliahialoʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small shrubby form of Hawaiian sandalwood (Santalum ellipticum), found rarely and near the beach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all Hawaiian kinds of sandalwood (Santalum spp.), shrubs and trees, with fragrant heart wood, small pale-green or gray-green leaves, small, dull-red or greenish flowers, and small purple fruits. From about 1790 to 1830 sandalwood trees were cut and exported to China.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one whose clothes wear out fast, as due to carelessness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilieʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wild plumbago (Plumbago zeylanica), a native of tropics of the Eastern Hemisphere to Hawaiʻi, a shrub with white tubular flowers and thin, oval leaves that were used medicinally; the sap was used to blacken tattoo marks. lauhihi on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilihelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsystematic or unskilled in farming, working spasmodically.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilihia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of haʻiwale (Cyrtandra begoniaefolia), on East Maui, having unequal heart-shaped leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surface of the sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horizontal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikalakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corm immediately under the skirt, as of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>harness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>naked, nude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikiuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>iridium.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to strike suddenly; onset, striking, 
   • pour down, as rain; downpour.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a varnish, as made of candlenut bark, ti root, banana stump, and other plants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poverty-stricken, very poor, destitute; pauper (stronger than ʻilihune). lit., bare skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flesh of half-ripe coconut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilikona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wart. lit., hard skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima koli kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rare ʻilima with bronze-red flowers, domesticated on Oʻahu. lit., kukui candle ʻilima.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima kuahiwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of ʻilima.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima kū kahakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of ʻilima creeping on sand on which beach dodder (kaunaʻoa) grows. lit., ʻilima standing on beach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima kū kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wild form of ʻilima, not so often used for leis as ʻilima lei, the cultivated form. lit., ʻilima standing on plains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>domesticated form of ʻilima.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima makanaʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wild ʻilima growing on old lava beds in Kaʻū, with small flowers; of medium height.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima mamo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of ʻilima, probably same as ʻilima lei.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima ōkea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a domesticated ʻilima, light yellow in color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small to large native shrubs (all species of Sida, especially S. fallax), bearing yellow, orange, greenish, or dull-red flowers; some kinds strung for leis. The flowers last only a day and are so delicate that about 500 are needed for one lei. Fruits of maʻo (Abutilon grandifolium), when green and soft, are used with ʻilima leis, one fruit at each end of the lei ; or the pale-green, cap-like calyx of the ʻilima flower is used. A mild laxative for babies is made by squeezing out the juice of flowers; this is called kanakamaikaʻi. The ʻilima was designated in 1923 by the Territorial Legislature as the flower of Oʻahu. It is related to the hibiscus.  see songs, nōweo, pue₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilima₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>area where ʻilima plants may grow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻilipuakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white person. lit., white flower skin. Poetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliuaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro with large, thick, firm leaf blades. The corms are very large, with white flesh tinged with pink; good as table taro but not for poi; leaves good for lūʻau. lit., tough hide.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliwai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surface, as of water; level, horizontal, flat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliwai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carpenter's or surveyor's level.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliwai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water hose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻili hānau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the birth pebbles of Kōloa (a small section of the beach at Puna-luʻu, Kaʻū), which were believed to reproduce themselves, the smooth nonporous ones being male, the porous ones female. These stones were best liked for the pebble hula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻili kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white kōnane pebble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻili makaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gravel, small stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻiliʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black kōnane pebble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pile, overlap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., mist skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiliʻōpua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane like the kea but dwarfed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leather.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>surface, area.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>binding, cover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>land section, next in importance to ahupuaʻa and usually a subdivision of an ahupuaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strap of any kind, as reins, harness, fan belt, machine belt; hose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pebble (less used than ʻiliʻili); kōnane pebble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻili₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>square, as in measurements.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimepeliala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>imperial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi hakakā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look for a fight; one doing so, antagonistic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi haku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek a chief, as of a lesser chief or priest wishing a new master; one who seeks a chief; a chief who marries one of higher rank than himself, or a sister or half sister so that their child will be of still higher rank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to find fault with, blame, seek condemnation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi hale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to establish, as a dynasty; to acquire authority, power, property; one who does so; to look for a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi hale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to form a friendship so close that one feels welcome in the house of the other. Rare today.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi hana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi hana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up trouble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek money, to earn a livelihood; commercial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek far, explore; distant traveler, explorer. fig., one with great knowledge or avaricious for knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi loaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>money-earner, as for a family; breadwinner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi naʻauao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek knowledge or education; ambitious to learn; one seeking education or learning, research, learning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek or strive for righteousness; endeavor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi ā loaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>discoverer; to discover; to seek until found.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi ʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek knowledge; a seeker of knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimi ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie, slander, stir up trouble by gossip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>looking, seeking; search.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimiʻepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deceit, troublemaker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wink, twinkle; winking, twinkling. cf. ʻiʻimo, (Hal. 35.19) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻimona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twinkling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻina uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black ʻina, perhaps young of Echinometra oblonga, or one of several other sea urchins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻina ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red ʻina, perhaps young of Heterocentrotus mammillatus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinaleo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prep. (part of speech).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinalua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>another name for huehue₂, native plant, stems used for fish traps...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinamona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>relish made of the cooked kernel of candlenut (kukui) mashed with salt (perhaps a contraction of ʻīnaʻi momona, sweet garnish).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinawaena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>preposition (part of speech).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinaʻina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reddish discharge preceding labor in childbirth, amniotic fluid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinaʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tiny ʻina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small sea urchin (wana), as Echinometra spp. Qualifying terms are ʻeleʻele or uli, kea or keʻokeʻo, and ʻula or ʻulaʻula. Some of these are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of stone, used to make octopus, sinkers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>contraction of ʻia ana in the idiom e aha ʻia ana? What is being done?
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinekuikikio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inquisition.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiniki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pinch, nip; sharp and piercing, as wind or pangs of love. (probably ʻini- + -ki, transitivizer.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinikua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insurance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinikua home</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>home insurance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinikua kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>automobile insurance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinikua ola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>life insurance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinikua pau ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire insurance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinikua ulia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>accident insurance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinikō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indigo (Indigofera suffruticosa), a West Indian legume with compound leaves, small reddish flowers, and small, clumped, curved seed pods, introduced to Hawaiʻi about 1850 for commercial purposes. It was not a financial success.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinipākeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in the pocket (used in the phrase: komo ma ka ʻinipākeke, put in the pocket [pocketed]).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiniʻini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pinch. [possibly an error - cited text example shows 'ini'iniki on p. 17 (in facsimile in new edition and  Ke Alakai o Hawaii 7/17/1932)]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiniʻiniki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pinch or nip repeatedly; tingling, as with cold.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiniʻiniki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a way of catching small eels by holding bait on the palm of the hand and clenching the fist when the eels come.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinoʻino₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spoiled, contaminated, rotten, foul, broken, damaged; wretched.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinoʻino₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stormy; storm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinoʻino₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wicked, sinful; sin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻinoʻino₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>angry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻino₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spoiled, contaminated, bad-smelling, of poor quality, ugly; spoiled object, pollution.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻino₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to injure, hurt, harm, break.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻino₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a commoner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻino₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very, very much, intensely. (Sometimes pejorative)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻināʻinau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make love; 
   • pleasant, agreeable, 
   • sprightly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio mea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ʻio hawk without dark markings.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>container for salt, as made of pandanus leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio poʻi moa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chicken-stealing hawk. fig., a clever thief, especially of another's sweetheart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio uli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dark ʻio, hawk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiokoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young pandanus leaves, white at the base and light green at the apex, as used in fine mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiolana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to soar, poise, as a hawk; soaring hawk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small rat, mouse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole lāpaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rabbit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole manakuke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mongoose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>introduced large rat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole poʻo wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>introduced large rat, probably Norway rat. lit., water-source rat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Guinea pig.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiolea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unsocial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻioleholokula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extinct variety of small, sweet gourd with long stem, formerly used as medicine.  lit., rat running on plains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻioleniho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>octopus lure. lit., rat tooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>classifier for rodents. see below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiole₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for a sinker of an octopus lure and the lure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to vibrate, whiffle, sough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻioʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mousy, like a rat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻioʻiolepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tattletale; to gossip or tattle maliciously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻioʻio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheeping, peeping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻioʻio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to project, taper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian hawk (Buteo solitarius), an endemic and endangered hawk with dark and light color phases, confined to forests on the island of Hawaiʻi, where it is regarded by some as an ʻaumakua. The ʻio signified royalty because of its lofty flight, and hence occurs in such names as ʻIo-lani, royal hawk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to twitter, chirp, peep; peeping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a round, light-colored bitter gourd (Lagenaria siceraria), about 30 cm in diameter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tag; a Hawaiian game similar to tag; to play these games.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle or food package; loaded with such bundles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻio₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who announces the presence of a chief; herald.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻipeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ibex.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremonial feeding by the high chief of the messenger carrying the image Lono about the island during the makahiki festivals.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiuʻiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intensification of ʻiu₁, lofty, sacred, revered, consecrated...; 
   • majestic, 
   • lofty, very high; 
   • distant, far away; 
   • long absent and out of sight; 
   • a distant realm of the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lofty, sacred, revered, consecrated; such a place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taboo isolating menstruating women in a special hut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwa puakea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as mānā₂, a fern. Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa hāuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the fan maidenhair fern (Adiantum tenerum), with each of the last fan-shaped subdivisions split into five to ten segments.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa hāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Venus-hair, a kind of maidenhair fern (Adiantum capillus-veneris), known in many warm countries, both wild and cultivated in Hawaiʻi. The fronds are subdivided into many small, bright-green, fan-shaped divisions, borne on slender, black stems.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa kahakaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., striped ʻiwaʻiwa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa lau liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Asplenium macraei) with narrow, feather-shaped fronds 30 to 60 cm long, with subdivisions of each frond lobed or scalloped. lit., small-leafed ʻiwaʻiwa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa lau nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fern (Tectaria gaudichaudii) with thin, triangular fronds 30 cm to 1.2 m long, much divided into rather broad lobes. lit., large-leafed ʻiwaʻiwa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa ʻAukekulalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., Australian maidenhair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa ʻāpiʻipiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the curly-leaved maidenhair (Adiantum tenerum f. farleyense), an ornamental fern much like the ʻiwaʻiwa hāuli, but the leaf subdivisions much larger, more deeply cut, fringed and overlapping. lit., curly maidenhair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwaakāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fern (Asplenium rhipidoneuron) with narrow, feather-shaped fronds, which are stiff, 10 to 30 cm long, dark-green, the divisions pointed and obliquely cut, their stems bearing many dark scales.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all maidenhair ferns (Adiantum spp.), from warm regions of the world, many grown ornamentally. The stems are dark, commonly shiny, slender, wiry; the fronds' subdivisions are four-sided, oblong, or wedge-shaped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small, high-mountain fern (Asplenium adiantum-nigrum), with shiny, brown stems and triangular or ovate, subdivided, stiff fronds, the spores numerous, often found covering the under side of the fronds. Known in many countries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwaʻiwa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. name for manawahua₂, ferns (Doryopteris spp), listed by (Rock) and (Hillebrand).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frigate or man-of-war bird (Fregata minor palmerstoni); it has a wing span of 2.1 m. fig., thief, so called because it steals food by forcing other birds to disgorge; also used figuratively for a handsome person, as follows.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Asplenium horridum) with narrow, feather-shaped fronds 45 to 95 cm long, their dark stems bearing dark-brown hairs and scales. The stems were formerly used for making hats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of ʻiʻiwi, a bird; considered by some an ʻaumakua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reddish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiwi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twitching of the eye, sometimes accompanied by contraction of the mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiaao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cooked and partly dried taro or sweet potato that becomes sour or ferments.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• contracted, drawn, as facial features; 
   • wincing, as in pain; 
   • to contract, wince, shrivel, as octopus that writhes or turns while being broiled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to see well; observant; to recognize and accost in a friendly way.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻimi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to seek again and again; one seeking everywhere, as for knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻimo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to blink.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to desire, crave, yearn for, wish; desire, liking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiwi haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cape honeysuckle (Tecomaria capensis), a climbing shrub bearing narrow, curved, tubular, scarlet flowers and fernlike leaves (Neal 765), introduced to Kaʻū by George Jones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiwi pōpolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>immature, greenish-yellow, blackspotted stage of the ʻiʻiwi bird, lit., pōpolo berry honey creeper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiwi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scarlet Hawaiian honey creeper (Vestiaria coccinea), found on all the main islands; its feathers were used extensively in feather work. Also ʻiwi, ʻiʻiwi pōlena, olokele. cf. also ʻiʻiwi pōpolo and kikiwi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiwi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as the honey creeper called ʻakialoa on Oʻahu (Hemignathus obscurus ellisianus).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intensification of ʻiʻi₁, small, tiny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small hāpuʻu ʻiʻi and ʻamaʻu ʻiʻi ferns.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻiʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to restrain, choke back; to groan, as with exertion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, stunted, undersized, dwarf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>admired deep, rasping sound in chanting; tremor; guttural quality of some sounds, as back vowels or strongly aspirated "h".
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather, collect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reddish-brown, as a dog's hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small white seeds in a hala key, eaten by children and used as medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo hipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mutton, flesh of sheep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo holoholona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>meat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo huki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>muscle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo kupu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disease of the nose, gumboil; growth on the roof of a horse's mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo lau maiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellowish grain in wood, especially koa, named for its resemblance to the yellow color of a banana leaf (lau maiʻa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grain of wood; heart of wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo lūʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>greenish meat of turtles, considered the best, so named because its color resembled cooked taro tops (lūʻau).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo maha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temple muscle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flesh of coconut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo nui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>meaty, fleshy, as of some fish, or as the soft part of pandanus keys that are strung for leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo nui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fern known in many countries (Dryopteris parallelogramma syn. D. paleacea), up to 80 cm high, with feather-shaped fronds clustered on a short trunk, the frond stems clothed with long brown to black scales.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo nīoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>condiment of boiled pulp of chili peppers (nīoi), often mixed with relish such as ʻinamona.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo pale niho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gums. lit., tooth-protecting flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beef.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo pipi i wili ʻia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hamburger, ground round steak. lit., ground beef flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo pipi keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>veal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blood relative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo ponoī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one's own relative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo puaʻa uahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bacon. lit., smoked pork flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo ulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>growth, tumor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo ʻalaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>blood kin (but not children or siblings).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo ʻōhiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ʻōhiʻa wood grain; reddish grain of koa wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻoaweawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻoliu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenderloin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻoʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clitoris.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>true, genuine, significant, real; really, truly, surely, actually; true worth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grain of wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tight, difficult to extract, as a plug; stiff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to frown, scowl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move swiftly. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻiʻī₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lost, as old knowledge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOhaio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Ohio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOhiʻikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hold in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOihana Kahuna₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Book of Leviticus in the Old Testament.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOkaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a particular company of soldiers belonging to Kamehameha.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOkalahoma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Oklahoma.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOkalana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Oakland.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOkapoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Oxford.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOkeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Odessa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOkia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name, Hālawa, Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOkoikua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOle Kū Kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seventh and twenty-first nights of the month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOle Kū Kolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ninth night of the month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOle Kū Lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eighth and twenty-second nights of the month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOle Kū Pau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenth night of the month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOlekona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Oregon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOliona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Orion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOlolū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Name of a star (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOlopana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an Oahu chief, and uncle of Kamapuaʻa. When Kama stole his chickens, ʻOlopana repeatedly sent hundreds of men to catch him; but each time Kama's grandmother, Kamaunuaniho, sang Kama's name songs, and Kama's teeth cut down and killed the men carrying him on a stretcher. (FS 196-205).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOlopana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a famous chief at Waipiʻo, Hawaii, the brother of Haʻinakolo and father of Luʻukia and Kāwelu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOlumepia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Olympia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOluʻekeloahoʻokaʻamoena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>guardian of the sleeping place of the high chief or chiefess (said to be an expert lua fighter and of the same sex as the chief or chiefess). lit., ʻEkeloa breeze coolness that rolls mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOnekalio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Ontario.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOpikana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for ʻOpikanalani or ʻOpikananuʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOpikanalani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a mythical faraway place, higher than ʻOpikananuʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOpikananuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a mythical, faraway place.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOākiʻiala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOʻopuola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting; fish was said to be taboo to those learning the stroke. lit., alive ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻOʻopu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind associated with Waiheʻe, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻo … ia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>indicating recent action. Just, just now.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻo-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻō- (cf. ʻolalau); pronounced ʻow- before e (ʻoehuehu); the -w- need not be written unless the following vowel is the initial sound of a recognizable base, as ʻowala, to turn over (cf. wala, to tilt).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoaikū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gasping for breath, as during an attack of asthma; shortness of breath accompanied by a churning, heaving motion as by one attempting to breath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to entwine, twine; to stir round and round, as a liquid; to go round and round.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bubo, swelling
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>porous stone, as used for polishing canoes and calabashes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sprout, as sweet potatoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gambol, buck, rear, bucking, rearing,
   • turn over, somersault;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to brandish a club with a twirling motion; brandishing...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of the weke, goatfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Oʻahu and Maui name for a freshwater ʻoʻopu fish (Eleotris sandwicensis) called ʻōkuhe elsewhere. see ʻōkuhe for other names. The name ʻoau is said to be so called because of a tale: a fisherman caught a lot of these fish, but they disappeared; the fisherman called for them and a voice answered "ʻo au, ʻo au" (it's me, it's me) and the fish turned into lizards and scampered off.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cat, so called because of its cry: to mew.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoau₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoau₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a moss.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. spelling of ʻōawaawa, ʻowāwa, valley.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoehaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• crooked, distorted, deformed; 
   • to walk in an ungainly manner, swaying the shoulders; 
   • to waddle. 
   • fig., deceitful; trick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to romp, gambol, prance, leap; 
   • blustery, gusty, as a storm or angry person; 
   • to head straight for, as a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoehuehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of ʻoehu:
   • to romp, gambol, prance, leap; 
   • blustery, gusty, as a storm or angry person; 
   • to head straight for, as a canoe.    
cf ehuehu: animation varying from fury and storm to power and majesty...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoene₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mesh size between one and two fingers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoene₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>last taro taken from a crop; small-sized taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoeowewe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fluttering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoeʻoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young stage of the kawakawa bonito.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>resembling, like.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>much, indeed (sometimes following nō or connecting enumerations).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohai aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the pride of Barbados (Caesalpinia pulcherrima), an ornamental leguminous shrub with red and orange flowers. One variety has yellow flowers.  lit., royal ʻohai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohai keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the sesban (Sesbania grandiflora), a leguminous tree from tropical Asia with pea-shaped flowers about 7.5 cm long and pods to 60 by 1.3 cm.  lit., white ʻohai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohai ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the royal poinciana (Delonix regia), a legume from Madagascar, one of the showiest ornamental trees in Hawaiʻi because of its bright-red canopy of flowers, which are common and prolific in early summer. One form has yellow flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohai ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the red-flowered variety of ʻohai keʻokeʻo (Sesbania grandiflora var. coccinea). lit., red ʻohai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>monkeypod or rain tree (Samanea saman), a large leguminous tree from tropical America, grown in Hawaiʻi for shade and street planting; flowers pink, tufted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native legume (Sesbania tomentosa), a low to prostrate shrub with hairy, pale leaves and red or orange flowers about 2.5 cm long. (Neal 450)  White monkeypod (Albizia lebbeck) on Niʻihau. cf. (Neal 403).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather for family prayers (short for pule ʻohana).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohaohala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a half-truth, exaggeration; to enlarge on certain points; to exaggerate the arguments on one side, but overlook conflicting evidence; dichotomized thinking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohaohala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rank, of lush growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohaohala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, sweet, of melody.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe Kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bamboo with short, green joints and large leaves; wood hard, used for knives, fishing poles, house construction; introduced from Tahiti.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe hoʻonui ʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>microscope. lit., tube magnifying vision.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe kani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flute. lit., playing bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe kikoʻolā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native tree (Tetraplasandra waimeae), found only in forests of Kauaʻi above Waimea; about 9 m tall, with few branches, the leaves about 30 cm long, each leaf with five to thirteen large, oblong leaflets, and like some other araliads, with many flowers in umbels. lit., straggly bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe kāpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piece of bamboo carved for printing tapa; bamboo stamp. lit., printing bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe lau liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small-leafed bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dwarf bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe mauka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native tree (Tetraplasandra oahuensis), found only on Oʻahu; much like its relative, the ʻoheokai, but having oblong, entire leaflets. lit., upland ʻohe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe naupaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native naupaka (Scaevola glabra and S. kauaiensis), a shrub or small tree of the mountains, with yellow, curved, tubular flowers, about 2.5 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe nānā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spyglass, telescope, microscope.. lit., tube for looking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe piʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>siphon. lit., bent bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe puhi ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bamboo fire-blowing tube.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe puluka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flute. lit., flute (Eng.) bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water pipe, hose; bamboo water container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe ʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohelo huki manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flexible gummed rod used for extracting ʻuaʻu fledglings from their holes. lit., rod for pulling birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻOluʻekeloahoʻokaʻamoena, but a guardian of the opposite sex of the high chief or chiefess whose sleeping place was guarded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoheʻohe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall native trees (Tetraplasandra kavaiensis and varieties), closely related to the ʻohe mauka, and found on all Hawaiian Islands. Also Reynoldsia sandwicensis (Niʻihau).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoheʻohe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• all kinds of bamboo; 
   • reed (Mat. 27.48) ;
   • flute; 
   • pipe, hose, tube, catheter; 
   • bamboo tube for preserving fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a coarse, jointed, native grass (Isachne distichophylla), to 190 cm high, with stiff, pointed leaves and open flowering panicle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native bamboo-like plant (Joinvillea ascendens), with stem about 3 m high, 2.5 cm or less in diameter, unbranched; leaf blades 60 to 90 cm by 8 to 13 cm, pointed and plaited; flowering panicle about 30 cm long.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native tree (Reynoldsia sandwicesis), an araliad, with leaves about 30 cm long, each leaf with seven to eleven broad leaflets with scalloped edges. (Neal 652) The wood of this kind of tree growing at Mauna Loa, Molokaʻi, was reputed to be poisonous, was used for making poison images, and is the tree form of Kapo, a goddess. see kālaipāhoa, kauila. This tree growing elsewhere was not considered poisonous and was used for making stilts, hence it was also called ʻohe kukuluaeʻo or ʻoheokai or ʻohemakai.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro, thriving at altitudes above 450 m; leaf stem light-green, tinged with reddish-brown (perhaps like some variety of bamboo); the corm pink-tinted, making excellent poi. (Whitney 58). The term may be qualified by the colors ʻeleʻele, kea or keʻokeʻo, ʻulaʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohe₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variety of fish (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohi loaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to collect revenue; revenue collection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohi wauke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle of wauke bark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to listen in order to gossip; 
   • to gossip; 
   • a gossip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohikui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk ramblingly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• gathering, collecting; 
   • selection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gush, chatter aimlessly and ramblingly, gabble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohona manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohuʻohu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white tapa with black dots and figures.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohuʻohu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of ʻohu₂, adorned as with leis...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mist, fog, vapor, light cloud on a mountain;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adorned as with leis
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• taro corm growing from the older root, especially from the stalk called kalo; 
   • tender plant (Isa. 53.3) , 
   • shoot, sucker, branch (Isa. 11.2) . 
   • fig., offspring, youngsters ((FS 235);     
cf. ʻohana). also muʻu. see kalo for names of generations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻohākia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(perhaps a pas/imp., (Gram. 6.6.3))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoi lua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two-edged, as a dagger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoia ana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Let me see! Show me! I dare you! (sarcastically) (Usually shortened to ʻoiana or ʻoliana.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoia ana nō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>it's the same result; regardless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoia hoʻi hā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all right, then; so that's it after all. (About the same as ʻoia hoʻi: see ʻoia₁.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoia ʻaneʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Is that so! So that's it!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoiai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>while, meanwhile, during.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoiai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>although.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoiana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>usu. shortened form of ʻoia ana, Let me see! Show me! I dare you! ...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana aliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>duty or office of chief or king.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana aliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Book of Chronicles (Old Testament).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana hana kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mint. lit., moneymaking department.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana hana lima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana hemolele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clergy. lit., pure profession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana hoʻonaʻauao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>educational system, profession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana hoʻonaʻauao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>department of Instruction, Dept. of Education
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana hui malū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Society of Masons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kahuna₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>priesthood, office and duties of a priest, minister, or sorcerer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kinai ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire department; job of putting out fires. lit., fire-extinguishing job or department.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>secret service, department of secret police.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>military service.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kākau kope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>registration office. lit., copyrighting office.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kālaiʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>department of Interior, in the days of the monarchy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kālepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commerce, mercantile profession.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>finance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kānāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>judicial department.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana kūʻai ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>real estate business.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana leka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>postal department.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana mikiʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>manufacturing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana mokulele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aviation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana wai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water works.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana wai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>department (or Board) of Water Supply.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana ʻimi kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>finance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoihana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tools, utensils.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>procession of ghosts of a departed chief and his company. More commonly called huakaʻi pō.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoiʻoina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>point, peak, cape, promontory, headland.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoiʻoi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>superior; a superior person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoiʻoi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• full of sharp points, 
   • pointed, 
   • sharp; 
   • thorn; 
   • to protrude, stick or jut out.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoka kilika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the silky or silver oak (Grevillea robusta), a large tree from Australia, used for reforesting in Hawaiʻi. The leaves are subdivided like some ferns; the orange flowers are abundant in early summer.  lit., silk oak. also haʻikū keʻokeʻo and on Niʻihau, ʻoka.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoka pua ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokakalika ʻakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oxalic acid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokanaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>organdy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• district or subdistrict, usually comprising several ahupuaʻa; 
   • portion, as of food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>organ.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokanika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>organic (said of the Organic Act).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>octave.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokaʻoka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bad odor, as of garbage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokaʻokai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insipid, tasteless, especially of freshly pounded poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rotten, as wood, cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokekelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ostrich. ʻakolika is more common.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ocher.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokelekelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ostrich.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokepela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>osprey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokepelaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vulture (RSV), ossifrage (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki huelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut only the ends of the hair. lit., cut tail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki kūmākena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut the hair on one side of the head, formerly a sign of mourning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki mahiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut the hair leaving a strip down the middle. lit., helmet cut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>divorce; to divorce. lit., cut marriage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki mauʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mow the grass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki pahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bob the hair. lit., smooth cut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki poe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bob the hair. lit., round cut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>subincision, to subincise; circumcision, to circumcise (a Biblical euphemism, (Kin. 17.10) ; the Hawaiian terms were kahe ule and kaha ule). lit., cut roundness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to behead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki puʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut the throat; cutthroat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoki ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to mutilate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>orchid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokika honohono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an orchid (Dendrobium anosmum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokikene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oxygen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokilipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cutting off, ending, severance, separation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokipuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forest clearing (term noted in Oʻahu land records).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokiʻoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cut into pieces, chop, 
   • prune, 
   • slash, 
   • carve.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokokomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>filled, as a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokolekē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a play language something like pig Latin. Example: e hesele ana ʻoutou sele ihesele, for e hele ana ʻoukou i hea? Where are you going? [sele is added at random.]. see language.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokomopila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>automobile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokoʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be early or continuing, of time of day.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻokūʻokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pitch, as a canoe tossed by waves; to rear and pitch, as a horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolalahina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frail, delicate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolalau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>somewhat lalau; wrong, incorrect; mistakenly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻole loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>not at all, void, not in the least, none whatsoever; of no value, worthless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻole wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Not at all! Of no interest, value, use.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolelehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drowsy, sleepy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolepū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to discard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻole₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>for nights of the moon beginning with ʻOle see also (Malo 31, 32, 35). 
     ʻOle Kū Kahi, Olekūkahi  n. 7th and 21st nights of the month...
     ʻOle Kū Lua  n. 8th and 22nd nights of the month...
     ʻOle Kū Kolu  n. 9th night of the month...
     ʻOle Kū Pau  n. 10th night of the month...
Collectively these nights were called nā ʻOle; they were considered unlucky for fishing, planting, or beginning any important activity because ʻole also means nothing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>joy, happiness, pleasure; happy, joyful, gay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a common ornamental shrub (Nerium oleander and var. indicum), native from south Europe to Japan. Its flowers may be single or double, white, pink, or red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, like lahaina in type of growth and color, but the pith dark-brown and the leaf sheath covered with red-brown hairs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Let me see! Show me!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shiny, sparkling, bright.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shiny, sparkling, shimmering, as moonlight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliliko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shimmering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to make merry; joyous, rejoicing, merrymaking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliwa kū kahakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>air plant (Kalanchoe pinnata, also Bryophyllum pinnatum), a succulent growing wild and cultivated in Hawaiʻi and other tropical countries. New plants develop along the edges of the thick scalloped leaves. The tubular green and red flowers hang lantern-like. The Hawaiian name was given because the first plants seen in Hawaiʻi grew near the beach.  lit., beach-standing olive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliwa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the olive tree (Olea europaea), from the Mediterranean region, a small tree grown only, ornamentally in Hawaiʻi, where it rarely flowers or yields fruit. Called ʻoliwa haole on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoliʻoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>delight, enjoyment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolo wae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calf of the leg. also ʻoloʻolo wāwae.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolo wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gourd water container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolo ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut shell cut lengthwise as a cup for kava.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine white tapa, said to have been placed over an image during prayers (Laie 467); perhaps a verb to make ʻoloa tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gift to a child at birth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolohaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• empty,  emptiness, 
   • sunken, 
   • hollow, as eyes or cheeks;
   • deficiency, deficit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolohani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike, quit work; mutiny, riot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolohewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>demented, deranged; delirious, incoherent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolokaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to roll along, as a wheel; 
   • to remove; 
   • to transfer, as a debt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolokaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stake to which a live rat was tied as a decoy in an owl-catching trap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolokele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bog, swamp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolokeʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• cross, gibbet, gallows (Eset. 5.14) , 
   • scaffolding; 
   • ladder made of sticks tied horizontally; 
   • crisscross, crossed; 
   • bones of a corpse buried with knees tied to breast. 
   • fig., contrary, antagonistic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolokā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shake or quiver, as flesh of a fat person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻololaiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all right.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻololā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻololā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small flying fish resembling the puhikiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻololī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>narrow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻololū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dejected, downcast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolomana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old man.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolomeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old maid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolomene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old man.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolomua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>foreskin. (changed to ʻōmaka in later editions of the Bible).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolopala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old fellow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolopū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inflated, billowed out, as a sail in the wind; puffed out, as cheeks of one eating; blistered, as hands from work; mouthful of food or water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolopū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native shrubby violet (Viola chamissoniana).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolopū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adze for cutting ʻōhiʻa logs for images.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolouha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overstuffed with food, an insulting epithet. lit., sagging intestine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloʻio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move swiftly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloʻolo wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calf of the leg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloʻolo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang too low, as a petticoat; to hang loose and long; to hang (as coconuts).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloʻolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to overflow, flood, as streams.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloʻolo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to loiter, lag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloʻolōna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sagging under a weight, overladen, loaded down; a burden.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoloʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>splashing on rocks, as a rough sea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>long gourd container used as a receptacle, as for kava or water; long body of a gourd used as a hula drum cf. heke, ipu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• double chin, sagging skin, jowls, 
   • calf of leg; 
   • scrotum; 
   • wattles of a turkey; 
   • fat part under the jaws of an eel; 
   • pendant; 
   • pendulous; 
   • to roll with fat; 
   • to sag, hang down.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• cool, refreshing; coolness; 
   • soft, supple, flexible, pliant, elastic, slack, springy; softness, slackness; 
   • pleasant, comfortable, at ease; comfort, amenities; 
   • polite, kind, courteous;  grace, courtesy, kindness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoluea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slacken, ease. fig., mental relaxation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gurgling; to gurgle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolēhala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheerful singing, as of birds in treetops.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolēʻolē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small conch shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolēʻolē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolēʻolē₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wide-mouthed grin, as of an idol; to grin thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• conch shell (Charonia tritonis); 
   • trumpet; 
   • crochet pattern with a design suggestive of a trumpet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk indistinctly or garrulously.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻolē₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoma Pukikī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dome-shaped cement or stone outdoor oven, as used by the Portuguese (Pukikī) for bread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomaliō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad, extended, extensive, flat, as land; a wide athletic field of ancient times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoma₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open the mouth, as though to speak, or as a child about to nurse at the breast; to ask indirectly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoma₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>female mahimahi fish; but cf. oma₃.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoma₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small adze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoma₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>space between opposing armies where sacrifices were offered; preparations for war; first men killed in war.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>omega.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>omer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomimo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>naked, nude.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lid, cover, plug, cork, as of a calabash; lamp chimney.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomo ipukukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lamp chimney.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomoʻomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• loaf; 
   • any long, oval body, as balls of arrowroot; 
   • a mold or molded thing, as adobe bricks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomoʻomo palaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loaf of bread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whiplash used to throw a keʻa, dart, as of olonā fiber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻomī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wither, droop; to burn weakly, as a candle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻona lama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drunk on rum or any alcoholic liquor; drunkenness; alcoholic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻona mau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>constantly drunk, alcoholic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻona miliona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>millionaire. lit., owner [of a] million.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻona waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rich person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, awkward, unskilled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonaulu loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wave of great length and endurance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonaʻona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>faint, dizzy, punch-drunk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonaʻona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bad-smelling, as stagnant water; unpalatable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻona₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drunk, dizzy and unsteady; intoxicating; intoxication.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻona₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>owner, possessor, proprietor; to own.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoneki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoneʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• here, 
   • local.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>onyx.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>moving, etc.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoninini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pick at food with no appetite, as would a sickly child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonipaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• fixed, immovable, 
   • motionless, 
   • established, 
   • steadfast, firm, resolute, determined (this was the motto of Kamehameha V and of Liliʻuokalani. 
    lit., fixed movement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoniʻoni₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup of ʻoni₁, to move, stir, shift, fidget...; to wag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoniʻoni₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>striped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoni₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to move, stir, shift, fidget, squirm, wiggle; movement, motion.
   • to take to court, as land matters;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoni₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirals of several colors in composite leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻono wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thirsty; to crave water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonohinohi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to shove, push, 
   • force into,
   • thrust on; 
   • to persuade; 
   • to give secretly or underhandedly; to offer in secret.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻonou poʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shove or push into something headlong, regardless of consequence. lit., shove head.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopakuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opossum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle, package; to tie in a bundle (sometimes preceded by ke).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Elaphoglossum aemulum variety), a small variety of ʻēkaha ʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopekama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opossum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopeni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopeʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>baggy and ill-fitting, as clothes; loose, sagging. lit., slack bundle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopeʻope kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundle that is hung, as bones of a relative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopeʻope₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• bundles, packages, 
   • baggage; 
   • to fold, as clothes (Ioane 20.7) ; 
   • pillow (Kauaʻi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopeʻope₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ʻōpeʻa₁
   • to twist, bind, or cross the hands, as behind the back; 
   • to throw over the shoulder, as a shawl; 
   • to overturn, overthrow; 
   • to evict, as a tenant; 
   • to trip, as with a spear thrust between the legs. 
   • fig., to deceive, trick, treat treacherously; treachery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• fold, crease; to fold, crease.
   • wrinkled; 
   • bend of a wave; 
   • sunken, as the jaw of a toothless person;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopi wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stream embankment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopihi kapuaʻi lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>limpet, umbrella shell (Siphoneria sp.). lit., horseshoe ʻopihi [this name post-dated arrival of horses in Hawaiʻi]. Called naka kua poʻi in some areas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopihi mākuʻekuʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopihi ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small bitter ʻopihi, perhaps Cellana sandwicensis, nonedible, used in sorcery, perhaps hoofshells. lit., bitter ʻopihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopihi ʻālinalina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>yellow-meated ʻopihi. lit., scarred ʻopihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salted and dried abalone from the mainland. also ʻopihi malihini.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopihi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design for tapa and mats consisting of small triangles, probably named for the limpet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fold, bend, crease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopiuma₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opium.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopiuma₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Manila tamarind (Pithecellobium dulce), from tropical America, both cultivated and wild in Hawaiʻi. It is a medium-sized tree, a legume, with long slender branches, four-parted leaves, whitish flowers in small round heads, and red, twisted pods. Round, flat, black seeds embedded in white, edible pulp were thought to resemble commercial opium, hence the name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopiʻopi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fold; folding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopiʻopi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lay a foundation, as of stones; to dam up, as water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopuʻopu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to belch; filled, as a calabash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻopu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to dive into the water, feet first, without making a splash, an ancient sport (used only with lele or lele a); one so skilled.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoulanakana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>orangutan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoumuamua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leader, as in battle or other activity; scout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻouo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young animal, plant or person; young woman, pullet, cock, youth; youthful, sprightly; immature, as a coconut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoupē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>beaten down, as by storm (UL 79); to cast down (2-Oihn. 25.8) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoupē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extreme lower end of a canoe paddle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻouʻou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sharp sound, as of a tapa mallet or of a tapping knee drum; to sound thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sharp, protruding; to protrude, project, jut out, 
   • piercing; pierce, puncture; 
   • to reach out for; 
   • to stretch out; 
   • to sound sharply; 
   • pinnacle, high peak;
   • royal; 
   • sharp sound as of knee drum or of tapa anvil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Bulwer's petrel (Bulweria bulwerii), a small sea bird; for some people, an ʻaumakua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gambol, buck, rear, bucking, rearing, 
   • turn over, somersault; 
   • to brandish a club with a twirling motion; brandishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowali₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, sickly, puny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowāʻowaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bivalve, perhaps one of the Isognomonidae.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>split, cracked, burst, grooved; to split, crack...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk loudly back and forth, roar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cry of the ʻaukuʻu, heron, which suggests ʻowā; to cry thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to retch, gag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a measurement equal to half the width of a finger, of fishing nets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in music, one of the five lines of the staff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻowē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>murmuring, rustling, soughing, whining, as of surf, leaves, water, wind, a bullet; to pitter patter, as rain; to sound thus; sound of tearing, as of cloth; buzzing of insects.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoālaala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• rising of the wind; to rise, as wind; 
   • to occur, as a thought.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoāliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>maidenhair spleenwort, a fern (Asplenium trichomanes) found on high mountains of Hawaiʻi and also present in many temperate regions of the world. Wiry-stemmed, narrow fronds grow in dense tufts 10 to 30 cm high, the fronds consisting of numerous small, round divisions on two sides of the stem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoāliʻi makaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Schizaea robusta). Called haili-o-Pua on Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoāuluniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoāʻoā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• split, cracked, burst, grooved; to split, crack.
   • gap, intervening space (Hopita)
   • fig., bereaved, forsaken.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk loudly back and forth, roar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cry of the ʻaukuʻu, heron, which suggests ʻoā; to cry thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to retch, gag.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a measurement equal to half the width of a finger, of fishing nets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoā₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in music, one of the five lines of the staff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variant spelling of ʻowē,
   • murmuring, rustling, soughing, whining, as of surf, leaves, water, wind, a bullet; 
   • to pitter patter, as rain; to sound thus; 
   • sound of tearing, as of cloth; 
   • buzzing of insects.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻeno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>twill plaiting, as in hats, mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to probe upward, prod, pry, prick,
   • jab, poke, 
   • gore; 
   • sharp darting pain; 
   • jagged, spiked.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to limp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stoop-shouldered, bent, as with age.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻoi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• redup. of ʻoi sharp, acute; sharpness...
   • prickly; 
   • sting, as of scorpions (Hoik. 9.10) ;
   • to protrude, as eyelashes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻoi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an inedible seaweed. Also called popohe makaliʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻoki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take effect, as intoxication.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻoleʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard, stiff, strong, inflexible, rigid, harsh, rough; rigor, strength, hardness. fig., strenuous, severe, strict, stubborn, obstinate; obstinacy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻolokū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• boisterous, blustering, 
   • stormy, 
   • disturbed; 
   • upset, as stomach; 
   • fury, rage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻololā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻolomaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>variety of bird, perhaps the maʻo, thrush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻolopū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to change, as appearance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻolu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two edible, fragile, red seaweeds (Champia sp. and Chondria tenuissima). They melt in fresh water, hence must be cleaned in sea water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻolu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thin, feeble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻolu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻoma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• concave; concavity, 
   • spout, 
   • gouge, oval-shaped chisel; 
   • flare of a bonnet; 
   • large sharp nose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻoma noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leather covering of stirrups.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lame, crippled; a cripple, lame person; to limp, be lame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for black bass, introduced in 1901. lit., foreign ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu hiʻu kole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of fresh-water ʻoʻopu. lit., red-tailed ʻoʻopu. It is believed that this fish drives other fish away, and hence must be thrown out of a net with an exclamation of disgust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu hue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swellfishes, puffers, balloon fishes, globefishes (Arothron meleagris and Chilomycterus affinus); not related to ʻoʻopu; these fish contain poison which is sometimes removed by those who like the flesh, especially the Japanese; the poison is sometimes fatal; considered by some an ʻaumakua. lit., gourd ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu hāpuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of large deep-sea fish said to be related to the ʻoʻopu. lit., ʻoʻopu of the hāpuʻupuʻu [family].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu kui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., spiked ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu kukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an introduced fresh-water black fish with sharp spines near the gills, said to have been introduced from China. lit., spiny ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu kumu iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>female nākea variety of the fish ʻoʻopu. lit., small source ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu kāniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a brackish-water ʻoʻopu. lit., striped ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu lehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large male of the nākea variety of ʻoʻopu, so called because its lip (lehe) is said to show when it hides in the mud.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu maoli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., indigenous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu moana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., ocean.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu moʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ʻoʻopu smaller than the kāniʻo, perhaps named for the moʻala, a crab.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu mākole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., red-eyed ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu nōpili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu poʻopaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., hardheaded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu puhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., eel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu ʻumiʻumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., bearded ʻoʻopu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu ʻōkala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spiny puffer fish, Diodon holocanthus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopuhue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong concoction made of green gourd and kukui nut, used as an enema.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopukai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of taro, so named as the leaf stem is similar in coloring to the salt-water ʻoʻopu (the fish), being yellow-green with dark-purple markings. The corms are used mainly as table taro, the leaves often for lūʻau. Grown chiefly in uplands of Kona, Hawaiʻi. The name may be qualified by the colors keʻokeʻo and ʻulaʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻopu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for fishes included in the families Eleotridae, Gobiidae, and Blennidae. Some are in salt water near the shore, others in fresh water, and some said to be in either fresh or salt water. Varieties include bluespotted goby (Quisquilius eugenius) and indigo hover goby (Ptereleotris heteropterus).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻoʻō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to crow, as a rooster; cock-a-doodle-doo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻUhane Hemolele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Holy Ghost, Holy Spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻUlakamakaiākuikuipahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻUlalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a reddish-hued rain associated with Haʻikū, Maui, and Mt. Kaʻala, Oʻahu. Also a wind at Piʻiholo, Maui (Nak. 68).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻUmi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably the most famous of early chiefs, dated by Fornander (For. 6:324) as thirteen generations before Kalākaua. Allowing twenty-five years to a generation, this would place ʻUmi's time at about A.D. 1550. Beckwith (HM 391) calls the ʻUmi legend 'one of the most popular of all Hawaiian prose sagas of heroes, embellished as it is with many stock episodes but still preserving the thread of historical accuracy. ʻUmi is still famed as a farmer and fisherman.. .. He kept up the worship of the gods and magnified the practice of human sacrifice.' ʻUmi was conceived by Līloa on his travels. He left recognition tokens, which ʻUmi later took to Līloa. The hostile, oppressive older brother, Hākau, with the conniving of a kahuna, was stoned to death, and ʻUmi left his incognito poverty to become ruling chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻUnuloa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind, Puna, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala hoʻomalamala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mashed sweet potato, slightly fermented and eaten as poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala hēʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala hūpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Madeira vine (Boussingaultia gracilis.)  lit., mucus sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala kahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the white or Irish potato (Solanum tuberosum), a weak-stemmed herb about .9 m high, with lobed leaves. The white, starchy, underground tuber is a valuable food in many countries. A native of the Andes, it was introduced to Hawaiʻi in the early 1800s.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala lehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala nika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of introduced sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turnip (Brassica rapa). lit., smelly potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala ʻawaʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet-potato beer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala ʻula kīnaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of red sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻualalehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name later applied to yellow bamboo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, a yellow mutant of ʻakoki with large stalks; often called pilimai and similar to it but stronger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>see uhi ʻuala, a variety of yam (Dioscorea alata).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large muscles of the upper arm, biceps, brachii.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuala₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of cowry shell (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to intercede, arbitrate, reconcile, mediate; 
   • referee, umpire, conciliator, arbitrator, peacemaker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark-rumped petrel (Pterodroma phaeopygia sandwichensis), an endangered sea bird, considered by some an ʻaumakua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuaʻu kani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wedge-tailed shearwater or moaning bird (Puffinus pacificus chlororhynchus). lit., calling ʻuaʻu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuaʻu kēwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(Malo text, chapter 13, section 23)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuaʻuala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sour odor, as of fermenting or decaying sweet potatoes; to smell thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻueʻuele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wet (used with kēhau, dew).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wasteful, extravagant; waste, extravagance; to waste.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuha ʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to waste food or anything; to squander; extravagant; extravagance. (The old Hawaiians did not waste food.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuhaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small, downy, American weed (Waltheria indica var. americana), with ovate leaves and small, clustered yellow flowers. Leaves and inner bark of root are very bitter and are used for tea or chewed to relieve sore throat. (Neal 575–6) One of the plant forms of the pig demigod Kamapuaʻa (FS 215).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuhane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soul, spirit, ghost; dirge or song of lamentation (rare); spiritual.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuhane haukaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wandering, friendless spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuhane hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a traveling spirit, usually of a living person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuhane kiaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>guardian spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuhane kīhei pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a spirit partially controlling a person and giving him strength, animation, or talents. lit., flower-mantle spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻuhane noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a spirit possessing a person completely and talking through him.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>