<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns:cx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:math="http://exslt.org/math" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mmc="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:saxon="http://saxon.sf.net/" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:tl="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūwahanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a medicinal plant (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sentinel's call of alarm, a trumpet call, as in war.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūwaʻawaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stupid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūwelawela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warm, hot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūwā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shine, glitter, reflect brightly, as a night fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to share a little food, take potluck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻalalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scream, shriek, cry out, bleat; to cry loudly like a baby.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻalaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for puʻu ʻālaʻa, heap of small taro tubers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overcooked, as taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali inu wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>temperance league. lit., water drinking host.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali kaua kaʻi wāwae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>infantry. lit., war army proceeding afoot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali kaua lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cavalry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>armed forces, troops, regiment, brigade, corps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali koa hoʻohanohano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honor guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali koa lio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cavalry. lit., horse-soldier army.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻaliʻali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of varying thickness, as a cord or ʻilima lei not carefully woven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• warrior, soldier, so called because Hawaiian fighters tied (pūʻali) their malos at the waist so that no flap would dangle for a foe to seize; 
   • army, 
   • host, multitude.    
Various types of military formations are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to gird tightly about the waist, as of malo-clad warriors, or as corseted women; tight belt.
   • compressed, constricted in the middle; 
   • grooved, notched; notch; 
   • irregularly shaped, as taro;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>isthmus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slender abdominal stalk on a wasp's body.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in music, a decrescendo followed by a crescendo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>irregularly shaped ravine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻali₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a vague term for an adopted man or boy who had no servants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loose, slack; crumpled, crinkled, as ruffles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻao₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mesh about 0.5 to 1.3 cm wide, of mats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>womb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ti-leaf blossom stem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young white pandanus leaves that are good for plaiting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bitter; bitterness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻikaʻika₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>difficult to acquire or do.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻikaʻika₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>packed, crowded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻilihāluʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pūʻili design with one or more hāluʻa ridges or strips between the panels of the beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻilikoʻeau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pūʻili and koʻeau designs combined.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻiliʻili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to collect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻili₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bamboo rattles, as used for dancing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to clasp, hold fast in the hand, embrace, grasp firmly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of tapa-beater pattern: tips of zigzag ridges in adjacent surfaces meet and form sunken lozenges. cf. koʻeau, in which the ridges are parallel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻili₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>berry of the pōpolo plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻili₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game played with sugar-cane flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻiwaʻiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shy, as a horse; excitable, as a horse that is easily frightened.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻoheʻohe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Job's-tears (Coix lachryma-jobi), a coarse, branched grass closely related to corn, growing in many tropical regions, either wild or cultivated. It is an annual, .3 to 1.8 m high, with long, pointed leaves, and, at stem tips, hard, round, beadlike seeds—black, gray, or white—which are used for leis, mats, food, medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻoleolē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conch horn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tower, steeple, pyramid, peak; 
   • house for depositing a corpse; 
   • peaked hut, lean-to, tent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻukiʻuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• crowded, 
   • packed tightly, 
   • difficult.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻukuʻuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wee, tiny, small.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻulaʻula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red hill, earth bank (short for puʻu ʻulaʻula).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻulaʻula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻulu kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>army, fighting band, division, phalanx.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻuluʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to collect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻulīʻulī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of small gourd, as used for making feather gourd rattles (ʻulīʻulī), medicine cups (ʻapu), and individual poi containers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻā hipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flock of sheep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻā pipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>herd of cattle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻāʻā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scattered, dispersed; to flee in disorder and fright.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻāʻā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bundles, sheaths; to tie many; to besiege frequently.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Adam's apple (probably from puʻu ʻāʻī, neck lump).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flock, herd, drove; to flock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sheaf, bundle, as of grain or fuel that is not wrapped; to tie in bundles, 
   • binder,  bind.
   • bunch, 
   • package; 
   • clump, as of sugar cane (Kel. 116);
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to feed by passing directly from mouth to mouth, of masticated food such as fish or poi; infants and the aged were fed thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut crosswise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to besiege. (pua in (2 Sam. 11.1)  of the 1843 Bible was changed to pue in later editions; cf. puʻe)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pūʻōniʻoniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shell (Partridge tun).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• large triton conch or helmet shell (Charonia tritonis) as used for trumpets; 
   • any wind instrument, as horn, trumpet, cornet. The instrument may be distinguished from other pū by the qualifier hoʻokani, sounding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₁₀</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₁₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inactive, sluggish, quiet, dejected, bored (often following noho).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gun, pistol.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for pumpkin or squash.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tree, cluster of several stalks, as of bananas [pū maiʻa], pandanus [pū hala], or kava [pū ʻawa]; clump, as of sugar cane [pū kō]. (always precedes a noun).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head of octopus or squid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe endpiece, both fore and aft.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• coil of hair, topknot of hair; to form a topknot.
   • to coil; 
   • rope or line, as attached to sticks in an ʻōpelu net; 
   • rope attached to the front of an unfinished canoe to haul it to the shore; 
   • olonā string used in the game pū kaula; 
   • snotter holding the end of the sprit of a sail; 
   • to gather in, as sails;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to divide by lot: pebbles or seeds were placed under a tapa, and divided unseen into heaps, and the players drew to get the largest heaps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>pū₉</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat a little, share potluck, said in a humble invitation, as:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>u-₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prefix to some words to denote plural, as 
   uhaele, plural of haele, to go, come
   ulawaiʻa, to fish, of many persons or often
   unoho, plural of noho₂, to live, reside...; noho₃, to possess, as of a medium...
   unonoho, plural and frequentative of unoho... 
   uʻai (to eat), uheʻe (to slide; melt; hang down), uhele (to go), uhohoʻi (to leave, return often), uhoʻi (to leave), uhole (to peel), uholo (to run), uhoni (to kiss), ukaʻawale (to separate), ulakolako (to supply), unaue (to move), upiʻi (to go up)...
   (This u- is sometimes written as though forming a word with a preceding o, imperative marker, as Ou haele oukou, you go.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>u-₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prefix to many words with meanings ‘quality or state’; there is variation in some words of u-, ʻu-, and ʻū, especially in rare words. see:
   uahi, smoke... (ahi, fire...)
   uhaki, to break... (haki, break...)
   uhemo, loose, separated... (hemo, loose, separated...)
   ʻuhene, snicker... (hene, happy or joyous sound...)
   uhinu, oil, grease... (hinu, oil, grease...)
   ʻūlika, soft, sticky... (leka, sticky, slimy... [?])
   ʻuwaʻa, dig a furrow... (waʻa, canoe...)   
and others... uhaʻi, ukali, unahe, uoki, ʻūhini, ʻūkeʻe, ʻūlina, ʻūmalu, ʻūpoho, ʻūkele, ʻūlepe, ʻūliʻi, ʻūmelu, ʻūpī, ʻūpili, ʻūpoʻi, ʻuhane, ʻukemu, ʻuwehe, ʻuwā, ʻuwalu, ʻuwaʻu, ʻuweke, ūpē, ūkō...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uaakalīpoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a fine, cold rain. lit., rain by the līpoa seaweed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uahiapele₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind associated with Kīlauea, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ualehu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name, Hālawa, Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uamakalaukoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a rain at Nuʻuanu, Oʻahu. lit., rain amid the koa tree leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua hānai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain that nurtures the earth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua lanipili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a heavy rain, as one lasting for days and days, or a cloudburst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua limua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a period of constant rain. lit., mossgrowing rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua noe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>misty rain, fog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua ona o</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aforementioned (often before names of people).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua pūnohu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red rain in the sunshine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cold, bitter, drizzling rain. fig., hard experience.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• smoke; smoked; 
   • dustlike, spraylike; dust, spray, wisps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahi lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust wisps.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahi wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mist, spray, steam. lit., liquid spray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahi ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pungent sulphur smoke, as from a volcano.  lit., bitter smoke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahiapele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native variety of sugar cane, heavy-stooling, light red-purple, the nodes hairy-fringed, the internodes sausage-shaped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahiapele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>several varieties of taro described at Puna, Waipiʻo, and Kona, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahiapele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahiapele₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tree (Pelea barbigera), endemic to Kauaʻi, with opposite, elliptical leaves, conspicuous for their smoky-gray color. It is related to the mokihana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uahoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard, severe, harsh, indifferent to the distress of others.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move, as an object; 
   • to push aside; 
   • to move from place to place, as a tethered animal; 
   • sliding, as a door; 
   • opening and shutting; 
   • to be dislocated, as a joint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uaiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offspring of a chief and a mother of no rank. lit., little rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uakea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mist (famous at Hāna, Maui). lit., white rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uakea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white as mist, mist-white, white as breaking surf or snow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uakeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bend, crook, as in a path.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uaki hoʻāla</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alarm clock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uaki pūlima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wrist watch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uakoko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a low-lying rainbow. lit., blood rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uakoko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rain so heavy that it turns stream waters red-brown with the wash of the hillside.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uakoko₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reflection of rainbow colors in the clouds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ualeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ualehe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>loose, loose-fitting, as a dress; sitting with the knees wide apart; stretching the mouth, as in a grimace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ualehe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wary of a hook, as a fish once caught and having escaped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ualehe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to oust a tenant from his land and deprive him of the fruit of his work; to evict.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ualehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gray, ashy-gray.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ualehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ualei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread out, as a fish net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uananahuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uaneʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for auaneʻi₂, probably not, especially after words ending with -a. cf. (Oih. 5.39) .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light rain, mist.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wharf, pier, quay, dock, bridge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uauahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smoky-gray color, as of tapa; gray quality, as of a whitened sugar-cane leaf; smoky, hazy; a reddish-blue tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uauakaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stiffness of the cords of the neck.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uaua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tough, sinewy, glutinous, viscid, leathery; not easily broken, as cord. fig., hardheaded, willful, obstinate, tough-minded.  (For a rare use of uaua as a noun, see ʻīlioholoikauaua.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uaua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro. The name may be qualified by the terms ʻeleʻele, keʻokeʻo, mōlina, piko.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uauoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distant sound, as of blended voices.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aforementioned, the one talked of. ua is often followed by a noun and nei, here, or lā, there, and is used idiomatically (see ua o, ua ona o, mea₆ ).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uea hakahaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wire screen; screen, as on windows. lit., space wire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uea kelepona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>telephone wire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uea kukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>barbed wire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uea maka ʻupena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chicken wire. lit., net-mesh wire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uea moana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>undersea cable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uea poepoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth wire. lit., round wire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uea ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>telegraph wire. lit., speaking wire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ueaʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wireless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uene₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move back and forth, oscillate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uene₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break wind slightly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uene₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a string figure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uepa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wafer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uepa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uepa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wax seal, as used on envelopes; to seal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ueue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wriggle, squirm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ue₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to jerk, pull, twist, pry, turn, sway.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ue₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hula step: the caller announces the step to drummer (who changes the beat) and dancers by calling e ue (e imperative and ue). The right foot is extended forward with toes pointing, while both arms are brought forward to chest level with hands crossed and fingers tipped upward; the left hand stays up, while right arm and foot swing back in an outward arc. Then the right arm and foot are moved forward, and the step is repeated to the left. Then three short steps are taken forward. In the last step the left hand is forward, and the right foot and arm back. To do this step.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ue₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall, far apart. rare except in proper names.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ue₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of mat, made without stripping the pandanus leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uhumakaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting. (containing reference to ocean dwellers (EH))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large intestine, alimentary canal, colon. cf. 
   uhahemo, hemorrhoids
   uhalehe, same as wahalehe, fig., to exaggerate. lit., wide mouth
   uhalena, lazy, overstuffed with food. lit., lazy colon
   uhanui,  fat, weak. lit., big colon
   uhaʻula, lazy, good-for-nothing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhahemo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hemorrhoids.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhaiāholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pursue or run swiftly; to pass swiftly, as time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhakeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crooked, as a road.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhakole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strain in an effort to evacuate the bowels. fig., disobedient, stubborn. lit., red colon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to put together, roll up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>broad, wide.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhalalē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>obese.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, overstuffed with food. lit., lazy colon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to deplete.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhalula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhanui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fat, weak. lit., big colon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhao₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cone-shaped base from the kāhili staff to the first feathers, formerly of feathers, later also of silk or ribbons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhao₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenderloin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhau hili kinipōpō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>batter (in baseball).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhau ʻupena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strike with a net, as a bird-catching net on a long handle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhauhakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>used as medicine the name may have been uhau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhauhui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>presentation of a prayer, especially in ʻanāʻanā sorcery; to present such a prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhauhumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sew together, as sails; to lay together, as stones in a wall; to interlock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. of hahau₂, 
   • to offer a prayer or sacrifice; 
   • to lay before...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>covering for door opening, doorway frame.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lazy, good-for-nothing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offering place for fish on a heiau; to offer, as fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uheheu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fly or hurry as though on wings (ʻēheu).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhelehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sulky, annoyed, vexed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uheule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weak, imbecilic, impotent (an epithet applied to men).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi Niʻihau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam, the tuber with pink flesh; grown in Kona, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi hoʻonohonoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi kalakoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam, the tuber with mottled red and white flesh and white skin; grown at Hāʻena, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam, grown throughout the islands; tuber with white flesh and skin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi lehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam, grown in Kona, Hawaiʻi, having a tuber with pinkish flesh, the vine stem with red wings. Perhaps the same as uhi ʻulaʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi maka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>veil, mask.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bedspread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi pela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bed sheet, mattress cover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi poni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam, the tuber with red skin and red and white flesh; grown on the island of Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi pākaukau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tablecloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi pūkuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hub cap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi ʻuala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam, the tuber like a sweet potato; grown on the island of Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a yam, probably the same as uhi lehua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi ʻālela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of yam, the tuber having white flesh and skin; grown in Puna, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi ʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>patchwork cover or spread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhikino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>body covering, garment, shield.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>covering; throw or cast net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhipaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mother-of-pearl hook that might be used at any time of day. lit., solid cover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apoplexy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhiuhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic legume (Mezoneuron kauaiense), a tree with pink or red flowers and thin, broad, winged pods (Neal 435). The wood is hard and heavy and formerly was used for hōlua (sleds), spears, digging sticks, and house construction. also kāwaʻu₅, kea, kolomona, and the weedy herb Phaseolus lathyroides (Niihau).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhiwai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heavy fog, mist. lit., water covering.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhiwai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhiʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to debate, argue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• covering, cover, veil, film, lid; to cover, spread over, engulf, conceal, 
   • solid tattooing,    • tent (Puk. 26.12) ; 
   • overwhelm; 
   • to don, as a feather cloak.
   • fig., to deceive, hide the truth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large, bluish-brown birthmark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the yam (Dioscorea alata), from southeast Asia, a climber with square stems, heart-shaped leaves, and large, edible, underground tubers. The plant is widely distributed through islands of the Pacific, where it is commonly grown for food. (HP 166–172), (Neal 230). In the past botanists have applied the name uhi incorrectly to the hoi kuahiwi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mother-of-pearl bivalve, mother-of-pearl shank.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turtle shell piece used for scraping olonā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhi₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mark made by the gall of raw pūpū ʻawa (a shellfish) on tapa or on the skin as an ornament. tattoo (NKE12)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip, as tough skin of fish such as manini, humuhumu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhu pākali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an uhu fish used as a decoy. fig., to deceive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the parrot fishes, of which Scarus perspicillatus is among the most abundant and largest; uhu are plant eaters, the teeth are strong and beaklike, well fitted for clipping off food from coral. The name may be qualified by the terms aʻa, ʻāhiuhiu, ʻahu ʻula or ʻula, ʻeleʻele, halahala, kualakai or pālukaluka, lā uli, pānoa, piko ʻula, and uliuli. Name of growth stages are ʻōhua (very young), pānuhu or pōnuhunuhu (medium), and uhu (mature). Variant names are male and ʻōmale for a young stage. The colors of this fish are so pretty that it is sometimes compared to a sweetheart:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bolt, break away, as a horse; to pull, strain, chafe under restraint; willful, headstrong.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uhāuhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pant, puff, as a dog or as the wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ui kula Sābati</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sunday school catechism.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uifi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whiff.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uihā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weary, tired, bored, tiresome, burdensome.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uilani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to chafe under control, irritated by restraint; 
   • fret; 
   • restless, 
   • constantly seeking pleasure, 
   • spirited, 
   • flighty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>square-shaped braid, as in lei palaoa cord.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to ask, question, appeal, turn to for help or advice, query; question, catechism.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up, activate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ukalialiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the planet Mercury. lit., following the chief [i.e., the sun].
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uka lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>forested uplands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukalekale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• watery, fluid. 
   • fig., deceitful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukali haʻiinoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noun complement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukali haʻiʻano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adjective complement.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukali₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to follow, come after, succeed, attend, accompany, escort; 
   • follower, attendant; 
   • complement, as in grammar; 
   • reserve.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oakum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukaukai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fat, feeble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukikiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fetch, of several.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukione</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extreme unction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukiuki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• anger, resentment (FS 129); angry, annoyed, offended, vexed, displeased (2-Sam. 6.8) , irritated, peeved; petulant.
   • to hate (Kin. 50.15) ; 
   • fierce, 
   • adverse, as a wind;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukokole₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sore, inflamed, as eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukokomo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to enter together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a human sacrifice or pig substitute, as made after a chief was a victim of sorcery, in order to protect the living.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>penalty for wrongdoing; to pay for wrong done, as damages. Sugar cane, as halāliʻi, used in ceremonies for the remission of sins might be so called.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wages, salary, pay for work; to pay wages.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>installment payment; to pay in part.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hoʻomau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pension, alimony. lit., permanent pay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hoʻopaneʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interest, usury; to pay interest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hoʻopaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>premium, as insurance; down payment, deposit. lit., payment [to] solidify.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hoʻopaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine, forfeit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku hoʻēmi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheap or reduced price, discount.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kaulele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interest on principal, premium, extra or overtime pay. lit., payment added on.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carfare, transportation charge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku keu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>extra pay, bonus, left-over pay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku komo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entrance fee.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku komokina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commission (pay).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku koʻakoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coral polyp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>school tuition.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kuwala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interest payment, bounty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kākoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>subsidy, monetary aid, grant-in-aid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kīpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bribe, to bribe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kūmau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>customary or usual fees; dues, taxes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku kūʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cash payment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku lawelawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tip, gratuity, service charge. lit., service pay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku leka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>postage, postage stamp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku liʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>installment payment, small payment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku makahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>annual payment or salary, annuity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku makana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tip; gift payment, bonus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dowry; marriage fee, as to the minister. lit., marriage payment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku manawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>installment payment; to pay on time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>steamship fare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku palu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., soft uku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku pohō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>damages; to pay damages.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku pānaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>refund, redemption, ransom, reward; to redeem, refund.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku ʻēkena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agent's fee, commission.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukuhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pouring out, dipping, weaning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukuhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to pour out, dip, as water. (-hi is a transitivizer and a reflex of PPN -fi; cf. Tongan ʻutu, to pour, and (Gram. 6.6.4))
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukuhi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wean, as a child.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukupau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>piece labor, pay by the job rather than according to time, as on sugar plantations; used in pidgin for any work that everyone should pitch in gladly to finish; contract labor. lit., finished pay.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukuwai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place in the grass house where host and guests visited, between the sleeping place and the door.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ukuwai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name for that portion of a canoe between forward and after outrigger booms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a deep-sea snapper (Aprion virescens).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ulima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Urim.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uliulikapaliokahikinui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a stroke in lua fighting. lit., the cliffs of great Tahiti are green.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uliuli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a goddess of sorcery, said to have come from Kahiki... called by Emerson (PH 146) the arch-goddess of sorcery, she was invoked by Hiʻiaka in her prayers of resuscitation for Lohiʻau. (PH 144–7).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uluau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind associated with Waiākea, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uluaunui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a stormy Maui wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ulukoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ulukou₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>site of the Moana Hotel, Waikīkī, Honolulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ulukou₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an old name for Howland Island. lit., kou tree grove.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ululoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, said to appear on the night of Muku in the month of Māhoe Mua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Ulumano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a strong wind blowing from a given direction in each locality, as a strong southeast wind in Kaʻū and Puna, Hawaiʻi, and at Kāneʻohe, Oʻahu. lit., blowing hard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Uluʻoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(see (Gram. 2.9) for alternation of glottal stop and k)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ula ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire flames.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ula pāpapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a gray crayfish (Parribacus antarcticus). lit., flat ula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plait, weave, knit, braid; plaiting, weaving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>still, calm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prophecy of a seer (kilokilo); to prophesy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulawaiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fish, of many persons or often.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spiny lobster (Panulirus marginatus and P. penicillatus). Varieties are qualified by the terms hiwa, koaʻe, and poni.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a flame; to flame, blaze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ule hilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gonorrhea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ule hole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pulled back penis (an insulting epithet for men).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ule kahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>subincised or circumcised penis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulehala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aerial pandanus roots.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulehelehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unbound, unfastened, not tied, as a bundle; open, as a wound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulehole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>channel markers in a harbor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leap at, get into action, do quickly, do at once; one moving swiftly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to set, as type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulepaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a male who has not known a woman; not to have or have had relations with a woman. lit., bound penis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulepuaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., pig penis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uleule₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pendulous, hanging.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uleule₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sty, as on the edge of the eyelid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uleʻohiʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of sugar cane, unknown in 1978, once used as a salve (For. 5:585); perhaps the same as ʻāwela melemele and uluhui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uleʻulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>male breadfruit flower. lit., breadfruit penis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ule₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>penis. For imaginative compounds see ʻaʻawa₁, ʻaweule, ulehala, ulehole, ulepaʻa, ulepuaʻa, uleʻulu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ule₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tenon for a mortise; pointed end of a post which enters the crotch of a rafter (also called maʻi kāne).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ule₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hang.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uli koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bruises or wounds of a warrior.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>accident; sudden; to come upon suddenly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulihi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small endemic shrub (Phyllostegia glabra and varieties), in the mint family. Leaves are ovate, 7 to 15 cm long; flowers are small, white, tubular, abundant, in racemes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulihi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feebleness, of old age.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uliuli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of rock from which adzes were made.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uliʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fitness, aptitude; preparedness, as for running.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• any dark color, including the deep blue of the sea, the ordinary green of vegetation, and the dark of black clouds; 
   • the black-and-blue of a bruise.   
Some song composers avoid this word because connotations of evil or misfortune are associated with darkness and because Uli is a goddess of sorcery (see Uli₂).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>early stage in the development of a foetus, as the body begins to form.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uli₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given by (Malo) for subjects of the chief; (Emerson) says they are black-haired persons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uli₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to steer; steersman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uli₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crowing of a cock.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uli₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of sweet potato (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu hānau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of the same age group, contemporary, lit., birth growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu hōkū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>constellation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu imu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to stir up an oven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu kanu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>garden patch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unexplained acquisition of prophetic and interpretive powers without visible possession by a god. lit., placed inspiration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first victim slain in battle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>candlenut grove.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu manu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flock of birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fleet, collection of ships.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut grove.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu pali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>talus slope, transitional slope between cliffs and base.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu pono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow well; progressive, thriving, successful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flower garden, growth of flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to grow easily or without care; 
   • spontaneous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fleet of canoes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulua aukea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ulua, probably Caranx ignobilis, one of the largest of ulua. also ulua kea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulua kihikihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of ulua, Alectis sp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulua kāniʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., striped ulua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulua kūkaenalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probably a species of ʻōmilu, a fish. lit., beeswax ulua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulua paʻopaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>see paʻopaʻo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulua ʻeleʻele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of dark-skinned ulua, probably most commonly Caranx melampygus. lit., black ulua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulualono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>genealogist in the hale nauā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluamahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>officer in the hale nauā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>certain species of crevalle, jack, or pompano, an important game fish and food item. cf. ulua aukea, ulua ʻeleʻele, and paʻopaʻo. Unidentified ulua are qualified by the terms kaha uli, kihikihi (or kihi or huli pū), lā uli, mahai, mohaʻi (AP), nuku momi, uli. Growth stages are pāpio (or pāpiopio), pāʻūʻū, and ulua, the last attaining a length of 1.5 m and a weight of over 45 kilos. This fish was substituted for human sacrifices when the latter were not available, probably because of word magic and the meaning of ulua₂. Since an ulua replaces a man, ulua also means "man, sweetheart," especially in love songs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulueki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brush, undergrowth, forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluhaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>elevated place in the high chiefʻs house where those of rank might rest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluhaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough, jagged, as rocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all Hawaiian species of false staghorn fern (formerly known as Gleichenia spp., now listed under three genera: Dicranopteris, Hicriopteris, Sticherus), weedy, creeping, branching ferns, forming dense thickets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluhe lau nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large species of false staghorn fern (Hicriopteris pinnata, formerly known as Gleichenia glauca).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vexed, annoyed, discouraged, displeased (1-Nal. 20.43) , harassed, weary, offended, angry, upset.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulukai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water chestnut. lit., sea growing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulukū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disturbed, upset, restless, depressed, nervous, agitated, perturbed; nervousness, agitation; to disturb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ululele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a chiefʻs favorite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ululā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ostrich (RSV), owl (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulumāhiehie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>festive, attractively adorned and arrayed; to make a fine appearance, decorated, pleasing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulunahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wilderness, place of wild growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluna₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pillow, cushion, formerly made of pandanus; to use as a pillow (Kin. 28.18) . headrest (e.g. dentist's chair) (HE).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluna₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upper part of the arm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluna₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>center part of a net, as of a large ʻupena iheihe, (net used for iheihe fish).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upright, erect.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulupau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gather together; to go everywhere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulupiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to shiver, shake, tremble, as with cold or fright.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overcome by emotion, hysteria, passion, or an occult influence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulupē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intoxicated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulupō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark or dense as growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulupō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sudden sickness or stroke, the sign of which is a cock crowing at untimely hours; such crowing was also believed to indicate the arrival of visitors or a ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulupō₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish said to resemble the pāpiopio.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluulu lei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leis offered to the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>growing things.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluulu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tangled, snarled, snagged, mussed, ruffled, frayed; angry, violent, agitated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluulu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diving or scoop net, its mouth being held open with two sticks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluulu₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea cavern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluulu₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to munch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluwehi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lush and beautiful verdure; a place where beautiful plants thrive; festively adorned. lit., decorative growth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluāhewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mania, delusion, craziness; deranged; somewhat crazy, sometimes believed due to possession by a spirit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluāhewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>overgrowth; to grow wild and lush; bushy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluāoʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• confusion, 
   • mob, 
   • disturbance, riot; 
   • tumult; 
   • gathered in excitement and confusion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluāoʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>jungle; growing in wild profusion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluʻeo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name recorded by (Thrum) for a tree with hard wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uluʻālana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>offering, especially as made to priests for them to offer to the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• possessed by a god; inspired by a spirit, god, ideal, person, as for artistic creation;
   • stirred, excited; 
   • to enter in and inspire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• grove (see 
     ulu kanu, garden patch
      Ulukou, an old name for Howland Island. lit., kou tree grove. 
      ulu kukui, candlenut grove
      ulu lāʻau, forest, grove of trees
      ulu niu, coconut grove); 
   • assemblage, collection, or flock, as of 
      ulu hōkū, stars [constellation]
      ulu manu, birds [flock]
      ulu moku, ships [fleet]
      ulu waʻa, canoes. [fleet]
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick used in spreading hot oven stones; to spread the stones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kind of tapa made at Waipiʻo, Hawaiʻi; name of a quilt design.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>center, as of a canoe or net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulu₈</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a name used repeatedly in (For. 5:703–9) for Kaweloʻs warriors whose names begin with Kaulu (Kaulukauloko, Kaulukauwaho).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ulāheo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to appear and disappear quickly, as steam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umalei₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>apoplexy, stroke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umauma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chest, breast. fig., heart, character.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umaumalei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish similar to but darker than the palani or pualu. It has bright orange-red spots around the gills and side fins and at the base of the caudal fin where the spike is set. lit., lei [for the] chest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uma₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hand wrestling: each tries to force his opponentʻs hand to the mat; to push, press, grip; to pry, as a lever.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uma₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stern of a canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uma₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>curve.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to moo, bellow; to bark, of seals; mooing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oven, furnace (Ezek. 22.20) ; a heap of rocks placed in the sea for small fish such as the manini to hide in: this was surrounded by a net and the fish were caught. More commonly called imu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umu ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fire pit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umu lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>earth oven.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>umu pao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian oven built above the ground...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Unulau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wind famous in song noted on Kauaʻi, West Maui, and Niʻihau; according to (Emerson) (UL 196), the trade wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Unulau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light breeze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a foliose lichen (Parmelia perlata).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scales of a fish; scaly; to scale.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahi kalakala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough scales, especially from midbody to tail of certain fishes; scute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahi pōhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lichen growths on stones. lit., stone scales.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahinahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>many scales.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahipipi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young pipi shellfish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahipiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cracked and peeling, of the soles or heels of the feet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unahiuhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wee, tiny.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unana₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a plain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hermit crabs in general.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unaunahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scale, of fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>una₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shell of turtle or tortoise, carapace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>una₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as haha kā ʻupena (net gauge or spacer) so called because some were made of turtle shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>una₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>une</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• lever; 
   • lever on a sewing machine that raises or lowers the presser foot; 
   • to pry. 
   • fig., to urge, disturb, harass.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>une kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shift lever for bobbin winder of a sewing machine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nausea, exhaustion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honk of a goose; to honk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uneune ʻūhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of sitting wrestling with thighs of contestants shoved back and forth. lit., prying thigh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unikalio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Unitarian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uniona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>union, labor union.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scorched, partly consumed by fire, inflamed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unu pehi ʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rat-pelting pebble, insulting epithet for a person of no consequence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuhi kūlike loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>literal translation; to make such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuhi laulā loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>free translation; to make such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuhi pili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>close, literal translation; to make such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuhi ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to translate or interpret; translator, interpreter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>translation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuhi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take out, withdraw, as money from a bank, or a drawer from a desk;  to unsheath, extract; to take off, as a ring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuunu hoʻouluʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agricultural heiau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuunu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to singe, as the feathers of a chicken before dressing it, or the hairs of a pig or dog by rolling it over hot oven stones; 
   • to pluck, as feathers from a fowl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuunu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stick erected as a taboo sign.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unuunu₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young ʻōhiʻa timber, as used in making images.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• small stone, pebble, 
   • stone chip; 
   • wedge, 
   • prop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>altar, heiau, especially a crude one for fishermen or for the god Lono.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unu₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for a section of canoe endpiece.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>unā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fatigued, weary .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for an unknown disease, characterized by aching shoulders.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uoi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to move along, of many; to slouch along together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>idiom used only in commands. Stop it! Quit! Don't touch! Be careful! (see ex., hāmama)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to call out; a loud calling.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uouoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (Neomyxus chaptalii), known as the false mullet or false ʻamaʻama, distinguishable from the true mullet by its narrower and tapered mouth and creamy rather than silvery pectoral fins. The head, when eaten, was supposed to cause sleeplessness and nightmares.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>upai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tall, thin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>upaʻapaʻani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to play together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>upupā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sandpiper; lapwing (KJV), hoopoe (RSV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uwalo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to call out, as for help; to resound; a call.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uwaʻuwali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, limp, weak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uweka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, bleary, as the eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uweko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bad-smelling, musty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uwenewene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unclean in habits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uāniʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stiff, as salted fish; stiffness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uē helu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wailing call of grief and love, recounting deeds of a loved one and shared experiences; to weep and speak thus. lit., enumerating weeping.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uē kanikau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wail; wailing prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uē leo nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cry loudly, bawl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uē ʻalalā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to wail loudly, yelp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uē ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cry loudly; tantrum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to salute, greet...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bellow, roar, shout loudly, howl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>uʻauʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tapa dyed as with ʻōlena (turmeric) or noni.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wahineʻōmaʻo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the companion of Hiʻiakaikapoliopele on her trip to Kauaʻi to fetch Lohiʻau for Pele. lit., green woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waia₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a son of Hāloa noted for corruption and sin. lit., dishonor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waikini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>San Joaquin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waikīkī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place name used as a direction marker in Honolulu. lit., spouting water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waikōloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cold wind associated with Mt. Kaʻala, Oʻahu, and the nearby place of the same name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wailau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place names on Hawaiʻi, Kauaʻi, and Molokaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waileia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a morning star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wailoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star near the Pleiades, said to be a member of the group called Kaulua. It is also said to be a name of an ancient chief. lit., long stream.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wailuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a West Maui city, site of a late eighteenth century battle. lit., destructive water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waimea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a place name. lit., reddish water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wainaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name, sometimes called the patron star of Hilo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waiolohia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Kauaʻi wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waipaoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cool breeze famous at Waimea, Kauaʻi. lit., scooped water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waiuli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind, Honolua, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waiʻaleʻale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of the highest mountain on Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waiʻōpua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a pleasant breeze at Wailua, Kauaʻi. lit., water of cloud banks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place names beginning with Wai-, river, stream.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a moʻo guardian in many stories. She had moʻo, human, spider, and eel forms. As guardian of Lāʻieikawai in Paliuli, she prepared for her a house thatched with feathers (HM 526, 529). As guardian of Hinakekā, or equated with her, she floated as a gourd in the sea and was taken into Wākea's canoe (HM 219).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wakikana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Vatican.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wakinekona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Washington.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Walawala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waleweki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Warwick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wale₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Wales, Welshman; Welsh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wanakoua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Vancouver.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Waʻahila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rain in Nuʻuanu and Mānoa Valleys and the name of a ridge separating Mānoa and Pālolo Valleys. see saying, puʻipuʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wae ʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>selection, choice; nomination (EH)...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to weed, clear, remove grass or weeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waena moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>amidships.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waenakonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>center, middle, midway.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cultivated field, garden, vegetable plot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waewae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>selective.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wae₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to choose, select, pick out, nominate; 
   • sort, discriminate, separated, cull, 
   • to draft, as soldiers; 
   • to preen, as of a chicken; 
   • finicky, fussy; 
   • to reflect, meditate; 
   • appointment.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>u-shaped canoe spreader.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wae₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rib of a ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha haukaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smeared mouth; smutty-mouthed, evil-tongued.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha kale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drool at the mouth, talk excessively, gush; one who does so.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha kole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>garrulous, noisy, boisterous and obstreperous in speech; such a person; to rant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha koʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>garrulous, clucking mouth; to gabble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha lapalapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to scold, utter scathing remarks; one who does so. lit., blazing mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha lina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>finicky, of eating. lit., tight-mouthed; such a person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha mana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>voice of authority, person in authority. lit., powerful mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha mana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one who digresses from subject to subject; to digress. lit., branching mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a big mouth; to talk too much, tattle; tattler.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha pala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a coated mouth, said in derision of an ignoramus, especially one who does not know the chants honoring his chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha pilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>halitosis; foul mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha pio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be unable to speak; not to dare to speak, speechless. lit., imprisoned mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha puʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>protruding lips; unintelligible speech, as of one who has had a stroke. lit., lumpy mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deceitful, lying. lit., slimy mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha wali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glib-tongued.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bitter (ʻawa) and sadistic person who makes impulsive vindicative statements about the one he hates, attempting to strike at his weaknesses or guilts, and usually predicting misfortune that often comes true.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha ʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp-tongued, rude; to speak heatedly and rudely. lit., burning mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha ʻō koko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to slander one's own blood. lit., mouth that pierces blood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha ʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spokesman, mouthpiece, herald; speaking mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahaheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie; lying, deceitful, false; a lie, liar. lit., slippery mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahalehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wide open, as a door; too large, as the neck of a dress. fig., to exaggerate. lit., wide mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahamana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>screen, shutter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to goad, tease, banter; argumentative. lit., hard mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk glibly, brag. lit., watery mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahaʻohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk in a foolish, silly, senseless manner; such talk; such a talker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to nibble and pick at food without appetite. lit., red [sore] mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>neck of a dress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry on the back, as a child; a load so carried.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waha₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>square notch cut in the upper part of house posts, in which the wall plates (lohelau) were placed; tenon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>workshop, place to work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi hilahila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>private parts.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi hoʻomalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shelter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi hoʻopau pilikia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toilet, rest room.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi hoʻāhu ʻōpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dump, garbage pile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi hānai holoholona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cattle ranch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi kaʻawale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vacant place, vacancy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi kiaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lookout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi kū moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anchorage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi lulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shelter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi moe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bed (Hal. 132.3) , place to sleep.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi mālama pipi waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dairy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi noho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dwelling place, address.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi nānā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lookout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi pana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legendary place, sacred place, sacred site, cultural site... .
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi puhi ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crematory, incinerator.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi waiho lole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothes hamper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahieokeola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lignum vitae (Guaiacum officinale), a small tree from tropical America, with heavy, hard wood, useful for many purposes. The resin yields medicine and stain. The tree is also ornamental, each leaf with two or three pairs of rounded leaflets, the flowers blue and clustered, the fruits yellow and heart-shaped.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahieʻekeʻeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upper stroke in club fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahie₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fuel, firewood; to serve as firewood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahie₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stroke in spear or club fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine hana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>female servant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine hiʻu iʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mermaid. lit., fish-tail woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine hoʻowahine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>platonic wife, an old Hawaiian relationship. lit., pretended wife.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine kapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>taboo woman, goddess (specifically Pele — not a woman who might not have sex relations, as some believe).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fighting woman, woman in the armed services, Amazon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine kāne make</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>widow. lit., woman with dead husband.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine kāne ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spinster, woman without a husband, single woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine kāpulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>untidy woman, slattern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine maikaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a gray lichen.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine makua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>older woman; older sister-in-law or female cousin-in-law of a man.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>married woman, bride, wife.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine manuahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mistress, common-law wife...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine mālama kapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wardrobe mistress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine noho kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic shrub (Isodendrion hawaiiense) in the violet family, having the petals equal and without spurs. lit., woman dwelling [on the] plains.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine noho mauna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fern (Adenophorus tamariscinus), with finely subdivided narrow-elliptical fronds 10 to 40 cm long, growing on trees and on the ground. lit., mountain-dwelling woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine o ka pō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wife of the night. Similar to kāne o ka pō but less common.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>without a wife or sweetheart; bachelor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine ʻōpio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young woman; younger sister-in-law or female cousin-in-law of a man.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahine₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>plant names. (see table above).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>some, a little, a bit of.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to say, according to (usually followed by the possessive a or by a zero-class possessive and not preceded by either verb or noun particles).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take without consent, as food at a feast; to ensnare, trap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahuwahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to interlock arms, as while walking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahāwahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to treat with contempt, scorn, despise, 
   • abhor, 
   • ridicule; 
   • be disgusted, 
   • defy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wrapper, envelope, case, covering, sheath; a ti-leaf bundle; to wrap, cover, bundle up, fold up, roll up, swathe; to dress, as a wound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahī lawe pepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brief case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahī makaaniani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glasses case.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wahīʻeha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bandage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai Lūkini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perfume. lit., Russian liquor, so-called because musk was obtained from Russians in early days, the wet product being perfume. deoderant (KAN).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pool of water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai aka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water showing a reflection; name of a Nuʻuanu pool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chiefly water; royal liquor, gin (in Kalākaua's song, Koni au).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai aniani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crystal-clear water, artesian water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai anuhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tepid water, neither hot nor cold.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai au</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swirling water of a current.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aerated water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small house at the entrance of a heiau temple, where the ceremonial cord (ʻaha) was stretched.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sea water used for purification. lit., water of life.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spraying water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ice water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water obtained by shaking the dew or rain drops from the leaves of plants or trees, as was said to have been done in dry areas. lit., hit water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hoʻoheheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>digestive juice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hoʻohui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hoʻomaʻemaʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disinfectant; any kind of cleaning liquid, cleansing liquid, liquid soap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hoʻāno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Holy water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water-drop caught as in a taro leaf, much liked for purification and medicine, as it has not touched the earth. also called wai ʻapo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai huikala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water for purification.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hānai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small well from which brackish water was taken and poured into shallow pools called wai kū; this water later was placed into shallower pools and allowed to evaporate, leaving the salt. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water oozing as from a precipice or trickling down. lit., purging water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hōʻaʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toilet water, liquid spice, scented extract. lit., liquid that perfumes. perfume.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai hū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gushing spring, overflowing water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai inu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drinking water, potable water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai kahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>united, of one dye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brackish or salty water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leucorrhea. lit., white liquid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai koʻana waiū paka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buttermilk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gold-colored.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water in which tea has been brewed, tea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai kō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water with a strong current.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai kō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugary water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain water, especially as used for medicine and purification.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai laulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water carried in folded taro leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai lemi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lemon juice, lemonade, limeade.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai lāʻau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sap of plants.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai lāʻau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>liquid medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai mea ʻino</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai meli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honey. lit., bee liquor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai mimi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>urine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai momona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soda water, sweet water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut water or cream (the distinction was not clear; cf. kai niu, wailewa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large flow of water; excessive flow of saliva; to flow in great quantities, juicy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai pahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spouting water, geyser.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai paʻakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salty water, brine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai paʻipaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mixed liquid, solution, or drink of any kind (lama paʻipaʻi is more common for alcoholic drinks).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai piula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water from a faucet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai piʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rising water, overflow of water, flood (Ier. 46.7) ; to flow, overflow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai piʻipiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>charged water, bubbling water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai pua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honey from flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai puhia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind-blown water or spray, as of a waterfall; name of the "upside-down" waterfall in Nuʻu-anu Valley.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai puna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spring water. fig., a sweetheart.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai pūʻolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water in leaves, as of taro, that could be carried; coconut water. lit., bundled water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai pūʻolo i ka lau lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient name for ice. lit., water in a package of tree leaves, so called because ice was said to be brought down from the mountains in leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai welawela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>warm or hot spring.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻapo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water caught in a taro leaf, often used in ceremonies as it was regarded as pure in not having touched the ground. fig., a beloved mate, spouse. lit., caught water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻauʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bath water; bathing place or pool. A figurative use follows:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>poisoned or bitter water; bitter. fig., same as poli ʻawa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻeli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>well water, well. lit., dug water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred blood, as of royalty. fig., prominent, royal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intoxicating liquor or spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honey, sweet liquid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red liquid, blood, menstrual flow; rain runoff red with soil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻōhiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>juice or cider of mountain apples; cider in general; tomato juice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai ʻūlili</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fix firmly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiakua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distant, aloof, unsociable, exclusive, as of a chief too high to mingle with others. lit., godly blood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waianiani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of Molokaʻi sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waianuʻukole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a soft porous stone, as used in medicine or for octopus sinkers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiawī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the yellow strawberry guava (Psidium cattleianum f. lucidum), a small tree, like the waiawī ʻulaʻula in many ways but bearing larger, yellow fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiawī ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the purple strawberry guava (Psidium cattleianum), a small tree from Brazil, with smooth bark, smooth, shiny, obovate leaves about 5 cm long. The purplish-red fruit is round, about 2.5 cm in diameter, and has white pulp, good to eat raw or made into jam or jelly, tasting like strawberries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>disgraced; shame, dishonor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a file; formerly a rough stone used to grind and polish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agricultural land term commonly used in the 1840s, especially on Maui; meaning unknown.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a heiau where hogs, bananas, and coconuts were sacrificed, but not human beings; a heiau for moʻo spirits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small, tight bundle; to do up in such a bundle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiho akaaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie or place in full view; easily seen, obvious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiho kāhela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie widespread before one.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiho loa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to abandon completely, give up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiho mahi ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie fallow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiho maʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to lie sick, remain sick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiho ola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spare the life, to remain living.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiho wale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to leave without reason; to leave about carelessly; to set aside as useless; to neglect, to expose to view.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiholomoku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>depository, closet, cabinet, vault, file, receptacle, savings, place for laying up things in safe-keeping; internal organs of the body, funds, treasury; fiscal. (wai₄ + iho, directional, + -na, nominalizer.) Numerous types of waihona are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona hoʻomanaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>memory.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona hoʻonanea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>playroom, parlor; private rooms of the captain of a ship.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona ipu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cupboard, place to keep food containers; bases supporting bath basins in Solomon's temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>womb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona kukui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>candlestick, lamp stand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona kupapaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>burial vault.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona kālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>treasury, money depository, fund; fiscal. lit., dollar depository.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona lako kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>arsenal, arms depository. lit., war goods depository.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona lānahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coalbin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona mea laʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place for sacred objects; treasure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona meli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>honeycomb.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona moni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place for keeping money, treasury.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona noʻonoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mind, mentality.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona palapala kahiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>archives. lit., depository of ancient documents.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona panakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bank account, depository.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona pā ipu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cupboard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona waiwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>treasury, depository for goods, property; treasurer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihona ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>position of the land, lay of the land, position of the earth, landscape, panorama, scenery, topography.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihonaʻike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>intelligence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihonaʻōpala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dump, garbage container.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waihā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water upon which the breath (hā) of the priest has been expelled in order to impart mana; to give mana by breathing upon an image or person; to request earnestly in prayer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kidney disease that impedes urination. lit., little water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stream (Hal. 124.4) ; to flow, overflow, as a stream. lit., flowing water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>having ways of ordinary folk. lit., human pattern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikaua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a war temple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>juice of fresh kukui nuts, as mixed with fresh or brackish water and used as an enema. lit., white liquid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikoʻolihilihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tears that seem to cling to eyelashes. lit., liquid supporting eyelashes. Poetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alcohol.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quicksilver, mercury; silver, silver-colored. lit., silver liquid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>enema of a concoction consisting of the juice of the poisonous gourd, water, salt, and other matter, drastic and painful. cf. the more mild waikea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gonorrhea, of males; painful urination, perhaps due to cystitis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikī₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one whose father was a chief but whose mother was not, a term of contempt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikōʻihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>waterspout.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikūlonoʻakoʻakoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an old name for syphilis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waikūoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dart, as for war.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calm, quiet, as the sea; still water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• banished, as for unworthy conduct;
   •  exile. 
    (perhaps wai₄, to leave, + -lana, nominalizer)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a prayer uttered to free a taboo period.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>large leaf bundles of food, as poi, for carrying.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient variety of tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bile. lit., yellow water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut water. lit., hanging water. see riddle, lewa₁.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailiʻiliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a decorated tapa. lit., small colors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailiʻulā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mirage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailiʻulā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>of changing color, as taffeta or a stone; taffeta.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirit, ghost; remains of the dead.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an ancient variety of sweet potato, presumably introduced from Wailua, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wailuku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name reported for an ulua fishing line.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tears. lit., eye water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimaka lehua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>waterdrops from the ʻōhiʻa lehua tree; euphemism for menstruation. also waimaka-o-lehua
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimakaiakohi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a minor illness (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimakanui₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fern (Thelypteris keraudreniana), with large, broad, pale, subdivided fronds, the last divisions triangular or oblong, the spores arranged in small dots scattered on the frond back.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimakanui₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Pteris excelsa), with large, broad, bright-green, subdivided fronds, in general like waimakanui₁, but the last divisions longer and subfalcate, and the spores arranged in a line under the curled frond margin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimakaopele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Pele's tears.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimakaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>services to get rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimano₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone from which octopus sinkers were made.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimano₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adobe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Maui name for olomea, a shrub.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi name for a kind of māmaki, having leaves with red veins and stems resembling those of the olomea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waimāhoehoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip the flesh from bones, as for burial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waina maloʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>raisins. lit., dry grapes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place with water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>depository.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pyorrhea, bleeding gums.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waina₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waina₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Isabella grape (Vitis xlabruscana), a strong-climbing vine, bearing blue, loose-skinned fruits. This is a hybrid that succeeds best of any grape introduced to Hawaiʻi; little interest has been shown in the past in the grape industry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wainohia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>safe, safety.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiohinu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all kinds of cultivated dahlias (Dahlia spp.), named for a town on Hawaiʻi where the plant was first grown.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waioleka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fragrant cultivated violets (as Viola odorata).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiolina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>violin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiolina kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cello.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiolina kū nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bass viol.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiolono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>careful, cautious about what one says.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipahē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>courteous, gentlemanly, polite, modest, gentle, good-natured, easygoing, agreeable, complacent, gracious. This word is usually used in a favorable sense, but occasionally pejoratively:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipahū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gunpowder. lit., explosive liquid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipalupalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name recorded for a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipalupalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of tapa. lit., soft dye or pattern.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ice. lit., hard, solid water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipuʻilani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>waterspout (perhaps from wai puhi lani, heaven-blown water).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>request, prayer, as to the gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gunpowder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hapa ʻumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tithe, tithing. lit., one-tenth property.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hoʻoilina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inherited property, heritage, estate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hoʻolilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exports.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hoʻopae mai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>imports.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hoʻopae malū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smuggled goods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hoʻopaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>security, fixed assets. lit., solid property.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hoʻopuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>profits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai hui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>assets. lit., combined wealth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai inoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>par value, as of stocks. lit., name value.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>war goods, spoils.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>par value, just value.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai koko ola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wealth taken to cause by sorcery the death of an innocent person — this was punishable by the sorcerer's own death. lit., live blood goods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai koko pīlau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wealth taken to cause by sorcery the death of a sorcerer who had prayed others to death.  lit., foul blood goods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai komo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>imports.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai kālepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>merchandise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai kūʻai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>investments.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai lewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>movable or personal property; liquid assets; chattel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai maloko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tribute or wealth from the uplands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>great wealth, fortune.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>real estate, property that cannot be moved.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai pio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>booty, plunder, spoils
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai puka aku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exports.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai ʻiʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>true worth, as of heirlooms; marked value, as of stocks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiwai ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>worthless, useless, of no use or value, good-for-nothing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū haki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a breast that sags, but not long or pendulous. lit., broken breast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū heʻeheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>caked breast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū hoʻohuihui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>milk combined with other ingredients, as for a baby or person on a liquid diet; formula. lit., mixed milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū kahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flowing breast or milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū kau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breast filled with milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū kia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>condensed milk. lit., deer milk, so called because the first cans of condensed milk had a picture of deer on the label.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū kini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canned milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū luliluli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>milk shake.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū paʻipaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>diluted milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiū puʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>budding breast, as of a young girl.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiūhakuhaku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clabbered milk, cottage cheese. lit., lumpy milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiūkoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a breast that has milk from the beginning of pregnancy to long after weaning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiūpakapaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheese. lit., solidified butter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiūpaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cheese. lit., solidified milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>perfume, cologne, toilet water. lit., fragrant liquid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻaleʻale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rippling water, artesian water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻeleʻele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black dye.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻeleʻele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ink.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻeleʻele₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a dark-skinned person.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻele₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>black tapa dye; tapa so dyed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to drug fish with ʻauhuhu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻolu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cool, pleasant, attractive, soft, gentle, pleasing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻoʻopu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻōhiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻōpua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a disease similar to pulmonary consumption.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻōpua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>leucorrhea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waiʻōupe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mirage. lit., deceiving water.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grain in stone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to retain, place, leave, remain, earn, deposit (see more common waiho, waihona, waiwai, and less common wailana, waina₂, wai ʻūlili).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wai₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of house with thatch purlins separated by a width of two fingers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wakawaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of waka₁, sharp, protruding....; 
   • serrated, pointed, sharp, as a rake's prongs or the spikes of a sea urchin; 
   • hilly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp, protruding.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waki kiaʻi hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>house guard.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to tilt, 
   • lift backwards, 
   • fall backwards; 
   • to throw backwards, as with a backhand flip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wala kua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fall over backward; to throw or stab at the back; to turn a somersault backwards; to rear, as a horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walakīkē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to toss, hurl back and forth, as spears in battle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>anguish, burning pain, woe, torment; anguishing, smarting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walanuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>walnut. (Juglans spp.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walawalakī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to fall back; to plummet to the ground.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walawala₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of wala, 
   • to tilt, as a canoe in waves
   • lift backwards, 
   • fall backwards; 
   • to throw backwards, as with a backhand flip....;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wale hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sap in hau tree blossoms, chewed and swallowed to relieve constipation, and given to women before labor; slimy liquid obtained by immersing hau bark in water, drunk as a laxative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wale kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white mucus, as in the eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wale wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slimy with saliva. fig., to talk too much.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as nanea:
   • interesting, of absorbing interest; fascinating, 
   • to have a good time,  enjoyable; 
   • repose, tranquility; leisure, at leisure, 
   • relaxed, at ease, 
   • amused, 
   • engaged with, busy with;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>accustomed; so familiar that one does a thing without effort, as a dance; adept; to do well and effortlessly, as an acquired skill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waleluka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>walrus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walewaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to know a thing so well that it can be spoken without thought; letter-perfect; to know by rote or as a mother tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walewale keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>discharge following childbirth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walewalena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slimy discharge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walewale₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>deceived.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wale₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>slime, mucus, phlegm; sticky sap, as from cuts in tree ferns and māmaki wood that is mixed with bark in making tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>softness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waliwali</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gentle, easygoing, good-natured, smooth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walohia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pathos; touching, pathetic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waluhia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bird name (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clawing, scratching.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to claw, scratch, rub, grate, rasp, scrape.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>walu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>oilfish (Ruvettus pretiosus), caught in deep water; large, much prized for eating and used as a cathartic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wana hina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>streak of gray, as in hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wana kauila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wana with dark spikes. lit., kauila wood wana.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wanaoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>projecting in every direction, as the spines of a sea urchin; sharp-edged and projecting; to bristle, radiate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wanawana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• spiny, thorny, as cactus; 
   • spiked, pointed; 
   • sharp, as jagged cliffs, spine, quills.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wanaʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dawn; to dawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sea urchin, as Diadema paucispinum and Echinothrix diadema, considered by some an ʻaumakua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sharp-pointed, as sea-urchin spines; jagged, sharp; spike
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wana₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• a long spike or streak of light, as at dawn; 
   • to appear, as a ray of light.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waniki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>varnish; to paint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wanila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vanilla.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a general term for inland region usually forested but not precipitous and often uninhabited. see ex. below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao akua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a distant mountain region, believed inhabited only by spirits (akua); wilderness, desert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an inland region where people may live or occasionally frequent, usually considered below the wao akua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao kele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rain belt, upland forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inland region where koa trees grow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mountain area believed occupied by gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao lipo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inland region, said by (Kam) to be between the waoʻeiwa and the wao nahele. lit., dark wao.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao nahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inland forest region, jungle, desert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao one</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>desert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wao ʻilima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an area at a lower altitude than that called wao ʻamaʻu; also ʻāpaʻa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waohua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to plot to trap.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waoʻeiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an inland region.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wauke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the paper mulberry (Broussonetia papyrifera), a small tree or shrub, from eastern Asia, known throughout the Pacific for its usefulness. It belongs to the fig or mulberry family. The bark was made into tough tapa used for clothing, bed clothes; it lasted longer than māmaki tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wauke kuʻikuʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bast from fully mature wauke that required more beating (kuʻikuʻi) than younger wauke (wauke ohiohi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wauke mālolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wauke that was used medicinally, perhaps as a substitute for the mālolo (flying fish) often used in sacrifices.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wauke puakai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wauke bast dyed red for use as coloring material in tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wauwau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to travel off the path or crookedly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wauʻaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer for deliverance or thanksgiving.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wawaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to storm, rave, rant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wawai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>watered well, watery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wawaʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• redup. of waʻu to grate, scrape, scratch, rasp, claw, wear away by friction...;
   • fig., ill-natured, quarrelsome.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wawe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quickly; fast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wawā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tumultuous; racket, loud talk, echo, sound of distant voices, roar: rumored, talked about, resounding, repeating (see hānau wawā).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa holo hau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sleigh. lit., canoe running on snow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wide canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kai like</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a canoe with little sheer. lit., equal-sea canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kau hī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>canoe for fishing aku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>war canoe; an army formation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kaukahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>single canoe, as contrasted with the kaulua. lit., single-placed canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kaulua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>double canoe. lit., double-placed canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unpainted canoe set to sea after the taboos were lifted during the makahiki harvest festivals.  lit., white canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kome</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vessel of papyrus (RSV), bullrush (KJV).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa kūpāhoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a long, thin canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa lau kī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toy canoe made of ti leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa lolo niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>toy canoe made of coconut sheath.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa paulua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>said to be a large or double canoe with three ʻiako.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa puhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small, slim canoe used for surfing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa ʻauhau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tribute canoe; a basket filled with food and set adrift during the makahiki ceremonies, said to represent the canoe in which Lono returned to Tahiti.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a chief's canoe with red sails.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa ʻākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>starboard hull of a double canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻakau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head fisherman's canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻapā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skiff, rowboat; ferryboat. lit., board canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻawaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>full of gulches, gullies, grooves; gullied, furrowed, grooved.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻawaʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>muscular, one whose back bulges with muscles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻawaʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stupid, ignorant; ignoramus, simpleton, fool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻawaʻa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>upper end of a lobster's leg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻawaʻa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hollow at meeting of bones below the Adam's apple.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻawaʻa₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>desolate, uninhabited.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>trench, furrow, receptacle. fig., a woman.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>moving masses of liquid lava, so called because of similarity to a moving canoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻewaʻe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloven hoof, as of cattle, goats, and deer. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻewaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>head fisherman in charge of kūʻula, stone gods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grate, scrape, scratch, rasp, claw, wear away by friction; grater, scraper, as of cowry or other shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>waʻu niu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coconut grater; to grate coconut.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wehelauniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name associated with Māla, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wehewehe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wekaminika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Westminister.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wekeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Wessex.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wekuwia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Vesuvius.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wela Kaluka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Vera Cruz.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Welehu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient Hawaiian month, corresponding approximately to November. see month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Welo ʻUla</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a star name, perhaps same as Welo₅.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Welo₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a month in the lunar calendar. see month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Welo₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star used by navigators.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wenuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Venus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehe hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to remove a personal transgression by prayer, with or without offering; remission of sins; name for sugar cane used in such ceremonies.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehe ʻana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>opening, untying, etc.; prelude (EH)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• opening, unfastening, taking off; 
   • solution, as of a problem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>difference (with ʻaʻohe).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehewehe ʻano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>analysis; to define, analyze.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehewehe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of wehe, to open, untie, undo...
   • to unsaddle or unharness, as a horse; 
   • to pull growing taro stalks slightly apart so as to strengthen the corm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to go away.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehiwa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehiwa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehiwa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choice, prized; a choice object.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehiwa₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sweet potato.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehiwa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a secret play language used on Hawaiʻi to prevent others from understanding; u was substituted for vowels: U hulu unu ūkua ūhua for E hele ana ʻoukou i hea? Where are you going?.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehiwehi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>festive.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehiwehi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of pāʻū, woman's skirt...
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>decoration, adornment, ornament; to decorate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a song composed as an adornment, a song honoring someone.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wehi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wekaweka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a foul stomach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wekaweka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hardhearted; stingy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ink discharged by squid or octopus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dark organs of an ʻopihi, a limpet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>first dark excreta of an infant, meconium.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mucus in the eyes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weka₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weight.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke keʻokeʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., white weke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke nono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for a red weke identified as Upeneus. lit., red weke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke pahulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weke (Upeneus arge) named for a god on Lanaʻi. lit., nightmare weke. Also called weke ahulu and weke pueo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke pueo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weke, probably the same as weke pahulu. lit., owl weke, probably so called because of similarity of stripes on the tail and the bars of the Hawaiian owl's feathers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a species of weke (Mulloidichthys vanicolensis). The color effect of a school of weke ʻula is not red but yellow. They show themselves red when taken out of the water. lit., red weke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke ʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fish (Mulloidichthys samoensis). lit., staring weke.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wekea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>midday; zenith.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wekekē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whisky.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wekewekea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>pried open, loosened.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wekeweke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to open, as a crack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>crack, narrow opening; to open a crack, as a door; to separate, loosen, free.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>certain species of the Mullidae, surmullets or goatfish. All weke have large scales and are usually found in reefs, sometimes in deep water. Both red and light-colored weke were popular as offerings to the gods to turn away curses: see weke₁. For the connection of weke with nightmares, see pahulu₁. Unidentified varieties of weke are qualified by the terms koaʻe, lāʻō, moelua. see also weke ʻā or weke keʻokeʻo, weke ahulu or weke pahulu or weke pueo, weke nono, weke ʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wela ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scald, burned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wela₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a new field, as of sweet potatoes; a piece of land cleared for planting by burning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welehu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a deep sea fish resembling the hāuliuli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welelau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to touch the tip, as of a spear.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weleweka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>velvet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weleweka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the coleus (Coleus blumei), an ornamental perennial herb or small shrub, from Java. The leaves are ovate, toothed, variegated with red, yellow, green, purple. Small blue flowers are borne in spikes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welewele iwi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to strip the bones of flesh, as for burial. fig., to criticize or slander one's kin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welewelelau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>very end of the tip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weleʻā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lizard fish (Trachinocephalus myops).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wele₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>suspended, hanging; fine, thin, as thread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a greeting of affection, similar to aloha; a salutation in a letter, in longer form as follows:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weliweli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• violent, dreadful, horrible, fearful, ferocious; 
   • revered; 
   • respectful, as of the word of a chief; 
   • full of awe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weliweli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small weli, holothurian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weliweli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>numerous, immense, prolific.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fear, terror, dread; fearful, afraid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a holothurian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weli₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scion, sucker, shoot, as from a root; spreading root.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weli₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>phosphorescent light on water, believed caused by a ghost that was interfering with fishing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welokike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>velocity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welokā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thrashing, smiting, as a fishtail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welowelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flying streak, as of the tail of a comet or of a firebrand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flutter, float, or stream, as in the wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to set, of the sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• progeny, 
   • ancestry, 
   • breed, 
   • family trait or strain, 
   • group custom, 
   • heritage, 
   • characteristic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welo₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a strong purge made of the juice of the bitter gourd or seeds of kāʻeʻe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welu ahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ball of tapa cord used to carry fire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welu ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>red rag; tapa made of pieces of red tapa beaten up with other tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weluwelu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of welu₁, rag, ragged fragment; ragged, frayed, tattered...; shredded to bits.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rag, ragged fragment; ragged, frayed, tattered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>welu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>straggling clump, as of trees.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wena₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>glow, as of sunrise or fire, red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wena₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a close relationship, blood relative.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weoweo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a type of tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• red, redness; 
   • to blush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dried banana bark, perhaps so called because of a reddish color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wepele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vesper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weuweu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• herbage, grass, greenery; 
   • bushy or fuzzy, as a beard; 
   • fluffy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weweke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prayer for luakini dedication.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weweli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>somewhat afraid (less strong than weliweli).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weʻaweʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to help, abet, or tempt, especially in love affairs; accomplice; accessory in crime; one who aids or incites but does not share; procurer, pimp; to procure.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>weʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a red dye; to print or color red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wikapuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Vicksburg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wikiwiki₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>star name (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wikolia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Victoria.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wilemikona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Wilmington.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wilikine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Virgin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wilikinia Komohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>West Virginia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wikeke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>whiskey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to hurry, hasten; quick, fast, swift.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wikilia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vigil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wikiliola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vitriol.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wikiwama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wigwam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>veto; to veto.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wikolia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a fine lawn used in dresses; victoria lawn.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilelaiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Christmas-berry tree (Schinus terebinthifolius), a rather small tree, from Brazil, the leaves compound, each leaf having about seven leaflets, the flowers whitish, small, in large bunches, the small red fruits of the female tree abundant, resembling those of the pūkiawe. Named for Willie Rice [William Hyde Rice?], who during political campaigns wore a hat lei of the red berries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili kope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coffee mill, coffee grinder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili kāhei</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bit for boring, drilling. lit., circling drill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili kō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sugar mill, sugar grinder, to grind sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili lauoho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>locks of hair (Mele 5.2) ; false human hair twisted to fall down from the back, like a hair switch, described by Samwell of the Cook expedition (Beaglehole 1179), (Buck 562–3).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili makani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>windmill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>auger.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili ohi ʻili kope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mill for peeling coffee beans.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili oho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coil or strand of hair, as in a lei palaoa necklace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili papa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>planing mill.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili peahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fan, as for cleaning seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili wehe ʻumoki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corkscrew.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili ʻāʻī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to twist the neck; bulldog.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to stir, 
   • circulate, 
   • move in eddies; 
   • mixed currents and eddies; 
   • turbulent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilikina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sister, nun (Catholic).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilikāʻekā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snarled, tangled, as hair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilikī kīwila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>civil engineer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilikōī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dust or trash blown by the wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilimoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to turn, twist, writhe, as a reptile.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilinau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to writhe, twist, wriggle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wilipuaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corkscrew, hand drill, gimlet, screw auger (a euphemism for ulepuaʻa).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eddy, whirlpool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliwili haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the tiger's-claw (Erythrina variegata var. orientalis, synonym E. indica), distributed from India to southern Polynesia, resembling the native wiliwili in many ways but larger and commonly grown ornamentally in Hawaiʻi for its large, bright-red flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliwiliwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lawn sprinkler. see song, koʻiawe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliwili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Hawaiian leguminous tree (Erythrina sandwicensis, formerly called E. monosperma), found on dry coral plains and on lava flows, somewhat spiny, with short thick trunk. Each leaf has three ovate leaflets; flowers are clustered near branch ends and range in color from red to orange, yellow, white; pods contain red, oblong seeds, used for leis. The wood is very light and formerly was used for surfboards, canoe outriggers, net floats.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliʻōhiki kulina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corn sheller or husker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliʻōkaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chrysalis of night moth (ʻōkaʻi), cocoon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiliʻōkaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to whirl, bluster, as wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mill, drill, wrench, bit; various implements or machines used for turning are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spirals of several colors in composite leis, as of the cigar flower (kīkā).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wili₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>winihapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>brick, named for Captain Winship, said to have brought the first bricks to Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>winiwini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>redup. of wini₁, sharp, as a point. fig., impudent, nervy...; tapering, ridged.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wini₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sharp, as a point. 
   • fig., impudent, nervy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wini₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>viol.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiola ʻumi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>instrument of ten strings (Hal. 92.3) , psaltery (Hal. 81.2) . lit., ten viol.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiwo ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fearless, brave, bold, courageous, dauntless, intrepid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiwo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fearful, bashful, modest, afraid, timid, shy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiwo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>obedient; to mind, obey.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiʻu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to smart with pain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiʻu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dirty, filthy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wiʻu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>entangled, as a kite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wolekeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Worcestershire.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Word</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Definition
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>woa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>calm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wohi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one whose parent was of piʻo, naha, or nīʻaupiʻo rank, and the other parent of second degree collaterality. A wohi chief was exempt from the prostration taboo (kapu moe); he preceded the king on public occasions to see that others prostrated themselves; he was generally a near relative. rare: ohi, as in the spelling ʻAiohikupua . see saying kū kahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wolu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Kaʻū and Puna, Hawaiʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wolu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>walrus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wulekake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Vulgate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wulekula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vulture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wākea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the mythical ancestor of all Hawaiians. (Kep. 61–7)... according to Hawaiian tradition, a man rather than a god (HM 294). see Haumea, Hoʻohokukalani, Papa, Waka. Probably lit., expanse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wāle</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Wales. Prince of Wales, Keiki aliʻi o Wāle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā e hiki mai ana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>future tense or time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>past tense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā heu ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>time of beardless youth, preadolescence. lit., time without whiskers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā heʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>time when heʻe (octopus) abound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā hiamoe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>time to sleep, bedtime.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā kahiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient times, antiquity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā kamaliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>childhood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā keiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>childhood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā keiki kāne</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>boyhood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā ma hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the future
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā mamua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>formerly, old times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā oʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>maturity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rainy season.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā uʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>youth, time of physical perfection.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā ʻuʻuku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>childhood. lit., small time.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā ʻānō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>present tense.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to cleave, split, burst through, break through; 
   • to change, as money; 
   • to have sex relations with a virgin, deflower.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāhi pūniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>"skull cracking", difficult
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāikāhuli₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a calliopsis (Coreopsis tinctoria), an annual ornamental herb, in the daisy family, from central United States, the ray flowers yellow with dark-red at the base. lit., change [of] color.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāikāhuli₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>see
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāiʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>season in which fish are numerous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wākiuma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to vacuum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wālua₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to carry on a pole on the shoulders, of two.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wālua₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>middle, interior.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāluna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prophecy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wānana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prophecy; to prophesy, predict, prognosticate, foresee, foretell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāpine</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the lemon verbena (Aloysia triphylla), a South American shrub, with rough lemonscented, narrow leaves, and small white or lavender flowers in spikes. Formerly the plant was a favorite in Hawaiian gardens, and was used in leis.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwae huki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cramps in foot or leg, charley horse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwae pehu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gout, swollen legs or feet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwaeʻiole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cosmopolitan tropical club moss (Lycopodium cernuum), a far-creeping mosslike plant, growing .3 to 1.5 m high. Its stems and many branches are covered with short, narrow-pointed leaves, and are made into Christmas wreaths. Eight other species of club mosses also bear this name. (Neal 2–3) Other analysts call wāwaeʻiole, Codium edule, and list ʻaʻala- ʻula and ʻalaʻula as variant names. Some equate huluhulua-ʻiole and huluʻiole with wāwaeʻiole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hula step (general name).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to tear down, shatter, wreck, dash to pieces, break into, demolish; to break, as a law or a twenty-dollar bill; to cause disorder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwahi hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>burglary, housebreaking; to break and enter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwahi panakō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to break the bank, as in chee-fah or other games.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwahiwaʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>borer that bores into canoe hulls, a teredo. lit., canoe breaker
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name recorded as an insulting term similar to dumb brute.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāwena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heat; hot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wāʻōpio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>youth (time of).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tense, in grammar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to make a noise, roar, din; noisy, loud; 
   • to talk much, as of gossip: to talk loudly back and forth; 
   • to reason.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>space, interval, as between objects or time; in music, one of the four spaces of the staff; channel.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wā₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fret of an ukulele, guitar, or similar instrument.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wēlau Hema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>South Pole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>Wēlau ʻĀkau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>North Pole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wēkenanā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a pest, frequently followed by mauʻu Hilo
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wēkiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tip, top, topmost, summit, peak; of the highest rank or station.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wēlau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• tip, extremity, end, 
   • top, 
   • pole (not necessarily high or lofty, as wēkiu); 
   • extremes, as in fractions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wēlau alelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>tip of tongue.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sift.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the letter "w."
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wīkani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strong, hard, rigid, inflexible.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wīkaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wīlou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>willow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wīlou lohaloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weeping willow. lit., drooping willow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wīneka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vinegar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>famine; to suffer a famine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to squeal (For. 4:457), squeak, 
   • tinkle; 
   • the sound of wind, of gnashing teeth; 
   • any high shrill sound.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the wī tree (Spondias dulcis), a smooth, gray-barked tree in the mango family, from islands of the South Pacific. The round or ovoid orange fruits, called wī apples, are 2.5 or more cm in diameter, have apple-flavored, yellow pulp surrounding a core with a few seeds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wī₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the tamarind (Tomarindus indica), a large leguminous tree from tropical Africa and possibly Asia, grown for shade and ornament, and for the wood and fruit. The brown pod contains a few seeds embedded in sticky, brown, acid pulp, which is eaten or made into a drink. sometimes called wīʻawaʻawa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wī₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a female kīkī, a bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>wōwō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to bellow, roar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ā me</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>and (sometimes written ame).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rotten, of eggs that do not hatch due to infertility. fig., spoiled, worthless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āewa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• thin, tall spindly; 
   • to weave to and fro, as seaweed; 
   • to sway, as a branch or sea eddy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āewa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>possessing a family or lineage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āhole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic fish (Kuhlia sandvicensis) found in both fresh and salt water. The mature stage is āhole, the young stage āholehole. Because of the meaning of hole, to strip away, this fish was used for magic, as to chase away evil spirits and for love magic. It was also called a "sea pig" (puaʻa kai) and used ceremonially as a substitute for pig. Foreigners were sometimes called āhole because of the light skin of the fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āholehole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young stage of the āhole, Hawaiian flagtail.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āhua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. spelling of ʻāhua₁
   • to swell, as a wave; 
   • heap, mound, hillock, knoll, pile; 
   • heaped, humped; 
   • tremendous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āhunihuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for a fish of the ʻōpakapaka type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āhā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>aha (exclamation of surprise).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āhē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to exclaim, to oh and ah; yes, so that's it, so, oh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as ioio, grooves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āiwaiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• inexplicable, mysterious,  strange, fathomless, incomprehensible, 
   • wonderful because of divinity; marvelous, amazing, fantastic, 
   • wonderfully proficient or skilled; 
   • weirdly bad, notorious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ākeakea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of gray tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ākea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• broad, wide, 
   • spacious, open, unobstructed, 
   • public, 
   • at large; 
   • full, as a skirt; 
   • breadth, width. 
   • fig., liberal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ākēkē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for the ʻoʻopu hue, puffer fish, and listed by Malo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālaina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>obstacle, obstruction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>obstruction, hindrance, block, bar, screen; to obstruct, hinder, block, defend, stand in the way, oppose, hamper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>two sticks carried with the akua loa in the makahiki festival; they were used to mark the boundry of the taboo area.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālaulau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothes, tapa, mats; to envelop, clothe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālealea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a shellfish (Turbo sandwicensis); its shell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>salt bed, salt-encrusted area; salty, brackish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of two kauila or māmane sticks carried by priests before the makahiki god; also the two crossed spears with upright spear in the center, used as insignia for the present-day Māmakakaua society; small flag or streamer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālohaloha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(less used than hoʻālohaloha).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āloʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mud puddle, pool.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic member of the lobelia family (Brighamia spp.), presently known only on Molokaʻi and Kauaʻi, believed extinct on Maui and Niʻihau, an unbranched, succulent, thick-stemmed perennial about 1.5 m high, topped with a rosette of large oval leaves and racemes of long, white, fragrant flowers. also hāhā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quickly, hastily (used after hele, hana, holo, holoholo, hopuhopu).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ālālā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sweet potatoes that bear front branch (lālā) vines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āmio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• narrow channel, as to a sea pool; 
   • to move through such a channel; 
   • to blow in a current; 
   • to pass in and out; 
   • gusty. 
   • fig., to die.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āmuka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>reported as a var. name for the kāhala fish
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āmū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to trim, shear, shave; shaving, shearing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>attraction.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>insipid, tasteless.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>vibration caused by heat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• pas/imp of ane₁, moth-eaten
   • fig., a battered tramp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānea₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bare, leafless
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānehe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to come upon quietly, 
   • move stealthily, 
   • poise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āneho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>transgression of the law, wrong, fault; to transgress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āneo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a game; the stone called hiu was said to have been used in this game.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dizzy, unsteady, as one ill or intoxicated.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āneʻoneʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to itch.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āniania</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>smooth, calm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Eurya sandwicensis, a native tree or shrub in the tea family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānoni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. spelling of ʻānoni
   • to mix, interweave, intertwine, mixed. 
   • fig., confused, doubtful.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānuenue₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rainbow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ānuenue₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scallop-like design on tapa and tapa beater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āpau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>[old spelling, replaced by a pau]. all, entirely.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āukauka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inland; fishing grounds, identified by lining up with landmarks ashore.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rough, raging, as sea or wind; to injure, harm, rage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to grow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āulu₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tall endemic tree (Pisonia sandwicensis), with large, oblong, dark-green leaves; small, rounded flower heads, narrow, sticky fruits, and very soft wood.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āwā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>noisy, loud; to talk loudly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āēī eia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chant ending.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>āēīē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chant refrain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• jaw, cheekbone. 
   • fig., to talk a lot, jabber, jibber jabber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an instrument made of smooth bone, formerly used for abortion, lancing, or bleeding. also āʻōʻō, piercing ā.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mold found in souring foods, especially poi, generally known as Oidium lactis or Oospora lactis, but now called Geotrichum candidum.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēhē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>syllables repeated in chants at ends of verses, affording pleasure by repetition or sameness of sound harmonizing with repetition of sameness of drum beat; similar in function to English tra-la-la but different in mood, tending to be more serious.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēkoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>same as koa haole, false koa (Leucaena leucocephala), a plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēulu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>top of tree or plant; trimmed hedge top; cutting; to top, cut or crop off, as top branches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēulu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of taro, qualified by the terms keʻokeʻo and kohu uauahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēwe kapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred or taboo lineage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēwe lani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>chiefs of divine descent.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēweewe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kinsmen, lineage; pertaining to the family, having a family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēwe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sprout, rootlet; to sprout.
   • lineage, kin; 
   • birthplace; 
   • family trait;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēwe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• navel string; 
   • abdominal aorta, 
   • mature birth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ēwe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white of an egg.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ē₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a second ē often follows the head word for emphasis.  Ē is shortened to e before third-person pronouns: see e ia nei, e lākou ala.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ē₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>as in the common exclamation below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ē₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Alas!
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>īheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to spread out, prevail, as of calm, peace.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>īheʻeheʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to flow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>īheʻekai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turmeric or ocher with salt water, used as a daub by guardians of shark gods and other priests.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>īkā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to drift upon, 
   • strike against; 
   • to turn aside from a straight course; 
   • flotsam and jetsam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>īkā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sides of taro patch or garden.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōhāhā₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>flourishing, fully developed, plump, healthy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōhāhā₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>distinct, clear sound or voice.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōkea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>white sand or gravel (contraction of one, sand, and kea, white). cf. Ke-ōkea, a place name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōkea₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hot, as stone heated to whiteness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōkea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōkelekele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>muddy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōlaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weedy raspberry (Rubus rosaefolius) native to southeastern Asia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōlaʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>earthquake, tremor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōlaʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light porous stone or pumice, as used for polishing canoes or for scraping off hair of pig or dog to be roasted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōleoleo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to quarrel or speak noisily, raise a din.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōnahanahaiaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fertile spot in a lava bed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpuhe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>three species of endemic trees (Urera), related to the olonā, the bark of which was also formerly used for fishing nets.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū ao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster of clouds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū hale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hut, as in a forest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū malumalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shady clump; a humble way to refer to one's house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū nāhelehele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cluster or clump of any growth; thicket.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū weuweu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• clump of grass, 
   • a polite depreciatory way to refer to one's home, however magnificent it may be.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpūhea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>quiet, tranquil, calm, disinclined to work, lazy; tranquillity.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpūhue</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round, low calabash. lit., calabash clump.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• clump, as of sugar cane, bananas, kava; 
   • cluster.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to open, as a flower; 
   • to rise, as water; 
   • to swell, as waves; 
   • to grow, as a foetus; 
   • to sit with knees gathered up.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rest, hover, live idly or lazily, exist; existence, rest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōpū₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tower in a heiau. see drawing, (Ii 57).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōwī₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a weedy kind of verbena (Verbena litoralis), from tropical America, with square stems 30 cm to 2 m high, toothed oblong leaves, and narrow flower spikes bearing tiny blue flowers. Hawaiians use it for cuts and bruises, applying the juice externally and later sprinkling the affected area with powdered pia root.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōwī₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Jamaica vervain (Stachytarpheta jamaicensis), another kind of weedy verbena also from tropical America, similar to the above, but with oval toothed leaves, and tiny blue flowers borne on longer, narrower spikes. It is not used medicinally by Hawaiians.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōwī₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cry of the bird ʻōʻū; to cry, of the ʻōʻū.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōūʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fearless, courageous.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōʻukuʻuku₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small oʻu, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ōʻukuʻuku₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small, petite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to answer, reply yes, agree, say, talk; 
   • halloo, yes (in reply); 
   • tinkling, tolling, or chime of a bell; 
   • resonance, as generated by the thumping of a gourd drum on a pad; 
   • sound of whistling (Kauaʻi); 
   • sound of peacocks; 
   • to make such sounds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• to remain, endure, 
   • survive, 
   • continue, go on, continuing.
   • exist;
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ō₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>food provisions for a journey, especially at sea; sea rations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ō₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sprit of a sail or spar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ō₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for one, sand, in place names, as Keōkea, the white sand.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ō₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>imperative marker, perhaps less emphatic than the more common e.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ō₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>short for the part. iō, as after prepositions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ū wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water-soaked, soggy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ū-</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>(probably length of ū- was due to assimilation of the long vowel in the base.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ūi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>halloo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ūkākā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>female of ʻōʻō and ʻōʻū, birds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ūkō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fulfilled. fig., pregnant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ūkūkua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>besieged, pressed with work, crowded.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ūpē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• crushed, flattened; 
   • humble, bashful; 
   • dry and juiceless, as sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ū₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>breast, teat, udder.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ū₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>moist, soaked; to drip, drizzle, ooze; impregnated, as with salt.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAeʻaeahiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAha Hoʻokolokolo Kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Supreme Court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAha Kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Supreme Court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAha Koʻikoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., powerful court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhahui Hōʻikaika Kalikiano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Christian Endeavor Society.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhahui Kanu Kō Hawaiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Association.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhahui Moʻolelo Hawaiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian Historical Society.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhahui Māmakakaua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sons and Daughters of Hawaiian Warriors. Lit., warriors' society.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhahui Wāhine Kalikiano Hōʻole Wai ʻOna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Women's Christian Temperance Union.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhahui ʻEuanelio Pae ʻĀina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a term used in 1911 for evangelical conference of all the islands.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhahuina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>congregational.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhaʻaina Kauhalelewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Feast of Tabernacles. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhaʻaina Mōliaola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Feast of the Passover. (Bib.)
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhaʻaina Pelena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Holy Communion. lit., feast of bread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhaʻaina a ka Haku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Holy Communion, Lord's Supper; feast of the Lord.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAhuʻula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the feather cloak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikanaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikanaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., man-eating.(HM 241-242). an older cousin of Kawelo; on becoming chief of Kauaʻi he banished Kawelo's parents, thus provoking an invasion. see Kawelo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikanaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an Oʻahu chief who sent men to fetch the beautiful wife of Halemano, causing the couple to flee the island.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikanaka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a Maui chief who married Hinahānaiakamalama. Hina wearied of disposing of her children's excrement and lept into the moon. Her husband, trying to stop her, caught her leg. She hangs in the moon today.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikikauelono</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a star, possibly Sirius. Also called Hikikauelono (Hiki-kau-e-lono).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikiopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Ethiopia; Ethiopian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikoʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind at Nuʻalolo, Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAikupika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Egypt; Egyptian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAiliki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Irish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAilimaiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a method of lua fighting; to grab little finger of an adversary and twist it.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAiloli</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind at Kaupō, Maui. lit., sea cucumber food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAimaunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind at Hāna, Maui. lit., bait eating.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAiwohikupua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the Kauaʻi hero who vainly wooed Lāʻieikawai at the legendary land of Paliuli on Hawaiʻi.(Laie) lit., semidivine chiefly ruler.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkakia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Arcadia.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Assam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkamu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Adam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Arkansas, Arkansan.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkapakeka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Athabasca.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkelanika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Atlantic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkelona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Akron.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkenai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Athens.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkiliakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Adriatic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkilonakaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Adirondack.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkipohe₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind of Waiheʻe, Maui.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Azores.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAkulia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Assyria.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlahonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a light Hilo breeze. lit., land fragrance. Also ʻAʻalahonua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlakena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Arden.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlakona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Aragon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlalaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Ararat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlapani</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Albany.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlapia₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Arabia, Arabian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlekanekalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Alexandria.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlekaneko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Arkansas.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlemamaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Alma Mater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlemenia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Armenia; Armenian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAlepukaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Albuquerque.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmehaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Amherst.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmekekama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Amsterdam.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>America; American.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmelika Hema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>South America, South American.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmelika Hui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>United States of America.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmelika Huipū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>United States of America, American.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmelika Waena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Central America, Central American.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAmelika ʻĀkau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>North America, North American.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAnealika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Antarctic.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAneke</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Andes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAnekowela</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Andover.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAoa Laenihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rainy wind at Niʻihau, said to be so-called because it creeps (nihi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAoa₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a sea breeze associated with Honolulu and elsewhere. Also ʻAoʻaoa or Ulumano.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAoʻao Komohana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Western Hemisphere.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻApa₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Abba.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻApelika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Africa; African.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻApipa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Abib, a Hebrew month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻApokelupo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Apocrypha.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAua₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name recorded for the star Betelgeuse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAuhuhupaʻina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>var. name for the month of Makaliʻi, a time so dry that the ʻauhuhu plant became brittle (paʻina). See month.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAukekulalia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Australia; Australian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAukekulia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Austria; Austrian.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAukelana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Auckland.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAuwaelewa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a lua fighting stroke. lit., the floating chin
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAʻala Honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a wind accompanied by rain associated with Hilo. lit., earth fragrance.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAʻala Loloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wind name.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAʻala₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>winds.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻAʻā₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sirius, a zenith star that passes over Tahiti and Raʻiātea, formerly believed used by navigators; one of the brightest stars in the heavens. see Sirius for var. names.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻa-₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>prefix to numbers from one through nine, especially for counting in series.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae kai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place where sea and land meet; water's edge.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae o hope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>train of a dress (origin uncertain).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae one</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sandy beach.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cord, as used in joining two or more nets into a larger one.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaekai mokiha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient type of tapa (no data).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaekelona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>falcon, vulture.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeko kula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>golden eagle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeko₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eagle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeko₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>alto.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaelike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agreement, contract, truce, accord, deal; to come to an agreement; contracted.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeokahaloa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of fine tapa, used in kuni and other ceremonies, as for divining with pebbles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• wandering, to wander, 
   • shiftless, 
   • unstable; 
   • stray; 
   • tramp.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeʻa haukaʻe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of wild sweet potato, good only as pig food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeʻae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small native shrub (Lycium sandwicense) growing near salt marshes and among rocks near the sea. It has light-colored bark; succulent, narrow pale-green leaves about 2.6 cm long; small white to blue-tinted flowers; and small red berries.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeʻae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>water hyssop, a succulent herb (Bacopa monnieria). Niʻihau cf. (Neal 759).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaeʻoia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to be well supplied with comforts and necessities.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sap wrung from seaweed or leaves of plants such as taro;    • liquid remaining after dregs have settled, as of pia, arrowroot starch;    • saliva, drooling of the mouth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• fine, mashed, comminuted, as dust or powder; 
   • silky soft, as down; 
   • smooth, as well-mixed poi or bread dough.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rise, of the tide.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native fern (Polypodium pellucidum) commonly seen at Kīlauea Volcano. It has oblong fronds 15 to 40 cm long, once divided into about fifteen or more pairs of oblong segments, each of which bears many round fruit dots.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻae₇</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>shoots from main root portion of the wauke plant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hele honua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremonial measuring of the dimensions of a mana house within a place of worship; a priest carried a line to the four corner posts of the mana, and the chief sacrificed a pig; name of the line.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>general name for court assembly. Names of several types of courts are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo hoʻomalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>police court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo kaʻapuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>circuit court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo koa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>military court, court martial.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo koʻikoʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>superior court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo kākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old name for ʻaha kākau, court of records.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo malalo iho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lower court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokolokolo ʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>district court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>executive council.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻokō kauoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probate court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻomalu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>administrative body, assembly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻoponopono i ka nohona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>court of domestic relations.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hoʻoponopono waiwai hoʻoilina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probate court. Lit., court settling inheritance property.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hulahula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>assembly for ballroom dancing; a ball.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hulahula₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ancient assembly for the hulahula religious ceremony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hāwele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cord support for gourd water bottles.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hīmeni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>song festival, concert.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha hōʻike makahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>annual meeting of Sunday Schools, as of Congregationalists.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small gathering for private conversation; small or secret council, as called in an emergency.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha inu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drinking party, as:
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kapu₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sacred assembly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kapu₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sacred sennit cord belonging to a high chief and kept on a high place before his house; trespassers entering the house were killed if the cord remained in place, but if it fell down and the stranger stepped over it, this was a token of the stranger's high rank or kinship with the owner of the cord. Some chiefs had several such cords, each given a name, and some were used after the owner's death in making the kāʻai, container for his bones.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kau kānāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>session of the legislature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kaulike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an 1854 name for the highest court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kauoha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>probate court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kaʻapuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Circuit court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kenekoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>senate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kiule kiʻekiʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>grand jury.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kuhina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cabinet, assembly of ministers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kākau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>court of records.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kūkā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>council meeting, discussion meeting, advisory council, conference.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha kūkā malū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>privy council, secret deliberative meeting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha lunakahiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Presbytery, meeting of elders.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha lunakānāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>judiciary session, meeting of judges.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha maha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>place or assembly for practice of athletic games, as sham fights. lit., assembly for relaxation.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha mele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>concert, song concert, song festival.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha mokupuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>island conference, with representative from a single island, especially of Congregationalists.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha ninaninau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>court of inquiry.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha nīele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inquisition, inquest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha o nā lunakānāwai ʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>District court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha paeʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>convention of delegates from all the islands, especially as held by the Hawaiian Evangelical Association of Congregational Christian Churches.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha pule</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>congregation, prayer assembly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha ʻelele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>convention of delegates; name for American presidential conventions.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha ʻuao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>board of arbitration.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha ʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>council of chiefs. lit., regal meeting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha ʻāpana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>district court.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design said to resemble duck tracks, carved on tapa beaters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahahui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>society, club, association, organization, company, convention. Various types are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahahui hoʻole wai ʻona</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Temperance union. Lit., society forbidding intoxicating liquor.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahahui kula Kāpaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Sunday School association.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahahui malū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>secret society.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahahui ʻimi naʻauao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>academy, learned society.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahahuina₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>corporation, association.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahahuluhulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bristle worm, a hairy sea creature (Eurythoe complanata).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahakea lau liʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small-leafed ʻahakea (Bobea elatior var. brevipes).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahakea lau nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a large-leafted ʻahakea (Bobea elatior).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahakea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>native trees (species of Bobea) with small to medium-sized, oblong leaves; small greenish or white flowers; and small, purple-to-black juicy fruits. The wood is yellow and formerly was used for poi boards and canoe rims.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahakū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cord used for measuring, as in laying out a garden or house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahalualike</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rectangle. lit., two equal sides.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahamaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hammock, as of tapa, fastened to the manuea, center support of a house; hammock in general. lit., sennit meshes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahamaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cord with which edges of cracks in gourd bowls were sewn together in crisscross patterns suggestive of net mesh; the technique for such repair.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahamaka₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>strangling in lua fighting, as with green vines.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahamaka₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>secret meeting of priests to pray for a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahamele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a yellow-spotted needlefish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahamoa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an assembly watching a lua contest of the kind called hakakāamoa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahamoa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a cord made from the entrails of an enemy killed in a lua fight of the hakakāamoa type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaniu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native sedge (Machaerina mariscoides subsp. meyenii) with pointed, leathery leaves about 90 by 1.6 cm, mostly basal around a more or less zigzag spike, which bears light-brown scattered flower clusters. see also ʻuki, all species of Cladium and Machaerina.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahapiʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a kind of tapa dyed with kukui bark and decorated with fine lines, for chiefs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahawa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>waterhead, beginning of a water-course; to overflow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cordage.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to sit with back stiff and upright, arms akimbo, head up, as with haughty air of superiority; to sit cross-legged; to stand with hands on hips (considered rude and overbearing).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>young of the ʻaha, a fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina hepekoma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Feast of weeks.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina hoʻolaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast of consecration or dedication, as of a house, church, canoe, or fish net.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina hoʻolilo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast of dedication.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina hoʻomanaʻo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>commemorative or anniversary feast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina kahe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast given at the time of a boy's subincision. Called in Christian times ʻahaʻaina ʻoki poepoe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina kahukahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast given at the completion of a student's first work (as mat, quilt, tapa, net), or of a child's first fish catch; one purpose was to ask the gods to grant greater knowledge and skill to the craftsman. lit., feast to care for.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina kala hala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast given to ask pardon of the gods. lit., feast to forgive sins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina komo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>initiation feast.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina laulima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast held after completion of a joint project or cooperative undertaking, especially harvest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina maka luhi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast given to honor those who prepared the feast and served, the workers being served by those who had celebrated before; also a feast to celebrate completion of a particularly laborious project. lit., feast for tired persons.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina make</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>funeral feast, intended to comfort the mourners.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina male</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>wedding feast or reception.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina māwaewae</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast given shortly after the birth of the first child, intended to clear the way (māwaewae) of misfortune for that child and for all others to follow.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina piha makahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast on the first birthday of a child, or to celebrate any anniversary. lit., feast for completion of the year.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina pī wai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast given principally to break the monotony of country life; those instigating the feast would sprinkle (pī wai) their friends with a little water; those sprinkled brought food to the feast or, later, gifts of coins.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina waimaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast of tears, held on the first anniversary of a death, a happy occasion, as the death by this time has been accepted by the family.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻaina ʻūniki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>graduation feast, as for hula dancing or lua fighting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻōlelo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>legislature, assembly, council meeting, congress; to hold such meetings; to serve in the legislature.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻōlelo kau kānāwai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Legislature, lawmaking body.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻōlelo lunakahiko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>conference of elders.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻōlelo lāhui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Congress of the United States; national assembly.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahaʻōlelo nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Congress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>meeting, assembly, gathering, convention, court, party. Many types of ʻaha are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• sennit; 
   • cord braided of coconut husk, human hair, intestines of animals; 
   • string for a musical instrument; 
   • to stretch the ʻaha cord for the outline of a house so that the posts may be properly placed; 
   • measurement of an edge or border.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a prayer or service whose efficacy depended on recitation under taboo and without interruption. The priest was said to carry a cord (ʻaha).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>millepede, so called because it coils itself up like a string.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any of the needlefishes of the family Belonidae. The young are called ʻahaʻaha. Varieties are qualified by the terms holowī, mele, and uliuli.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaha₆</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>design supposed to resemble the continuing track of a duck, carved on tapa beaters.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>snare; to snare.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiian tuna fishes, especially the yellow-fin tuna (Thunnus albacares), an important fish in the Honolulu market. The name ʻahimay be qualified by the terms hiʻu wīwī (thin tail) or kaʻakaʻalāʻau (dark stripe), kaha uli, kananā (young stage, lit., the defiant one; cf. he aha sananā), kihikihi or ʻōpū hemo (loose belly), lepalepa, maha ʻōʻō (piercing brow), mālailena, maoli, pālaha, and poʻo nui (large head).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahi pālaha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>albacore, Thunnus alalunga (family Scombridae). lit., flat ʻahi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahia₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>how many?
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahiku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>seven (especially in counting in a series); seven times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahiʻahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to defame, slander, tattle against; false report, defamation, slander.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatch purlin. Also ʻaʻaho.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaho kopekope</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for roof thatching on top of the ridgepole.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaho kā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>small lashing on the pueo main purlin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaho piʻo kuahui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatch purlin support.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaho pueo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>main purlin in a house.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahohui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thatch purlin support.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahokele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>horizontal thatch purlin.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaholo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sliding rock, landslide, avalanche.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• garment or covering for the upper part of the body and shoulders, as a cape, shirt, coat; 
   • to put on or wear such; 
   • fine soft mat, formerly often used as a cloak; 
   • mat used as a canoe cover; 
   • short for ʻahu ʻula.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu hīnano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>soft, fine mat garment plaited from fine strands of dried bracts of male pandanus fruit.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu moena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>fine patterned mat, plaited with materials of different colors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu poʻo nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cloth bound about the head of warriors.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu ua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>old type of raincoat made of dried ti leaves fastened to an olonā net, or consisting of a small mat about 1.2 by 1.8 m, made of makaloa sedge, and so supple that it could be rolled up; to wear this garment. Today, raincoat is kukaweke and kuka ua.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu uhi waʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>mat canoe covering that protected paddlers in storms.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu ʻao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>choice mat of fine strands of soft white young pandanus leaves, about 3 cm mesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu ʻoʻeno</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>matting with twilled pattern, associated with Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahu ʻula₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feather cloak or cape made of the feathers of the ʻōʻō, ʻiʻiwi and other birds, usually red or yellow trimmed with black or green, formerly worn by high chiefs and kings. Today [ca.1957] about 160 have been located in museums and collections of the world, the largest being in the Bishop Museum, Honolulu. Imitation cloaks of plush, felt, paper, or dyed feathers (rare) are worn today in pageants and by members of Hawaiian societies. lit., royal cloak.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahulu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>discolored, foamy, feathery, choppy, uneven, mussed.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahuna</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>coat, garment, ti-leaf raincoat.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahunāliʻi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a tapa for chiefs, colored with candlenut and noni and striped red.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahunāliʻi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>issue of a union of a male chief and a commoner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahuʻawa haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the umbrella plant, a leafless ornamental sedge (Cyperus alternifolius), 30 to 180 cm high, the umbrella-shaped flowering head with about 20 grasslike rays at the top of a slender stalk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahuʻawa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a sedge (Cyperus javanicus) about .3 to 1.3 m high, with a basal tuft of long narrow leaves and a radiating inflorescence borne at the tip of a long slender stem.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahuʻawa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>another coarse sedge (Cyperus hypochlorus) similar to the preceding one, but with green instead of brown flowers.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>four (usually in counting in series): four times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻahē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a hacking cough; to cough. Also ʻehē.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai aliʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rule (or eat) as a chief.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai haʻa₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hula step danced with bended knees; the chanting for this dance is usually bombastic and emphatic (UL 266); to dance thus. lit., low style.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai haʻa₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>allegro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai hele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., to eat walking.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai hoʻokano</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat proudly of high-priced food, as a rich person; fig., to have many women.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai kalo paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>unpounded taro. fig., difficult problem that must be chewed, as whole taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai kanaka₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cannibal, man-eater; to eat human flesh.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai kapu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat under taboo; to observe eating taboos.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai kepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to cut or tear obliquely, as with teeth or edged instrument; to seize or tear with the teeth; to fit by rabbeting, rabbet.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai kū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat freely; to do as one wishes; to break taboos or transgress.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai kūpele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>medicinal juices mixed with poi or mashed sweet potato, used to build up strength. lit., kneaded poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai lau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat a great deal.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai lau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bundle of cooked taro wrapped in ti leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai lepo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat filth (insulting).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai lā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>scorched or sunburned.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai moku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruler of a moku, district or island; to rule a moku.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai māmā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>light meal, snack; to eat such.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai noa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat freely, without observance of taboos.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai nui</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>principle or staple food; to eat a lot.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai pala maunu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat a dab of bait. fig., to take the leavings of others, to steal another's mate, one who does so; a beggar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai pala niho</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., to eat tooth tartar.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cooked taro pounded into a hard mass not mixed with water, sometimes preserved in ti-leaf bundles. fig., a difficult problem. lit., hard poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eater of filth, scavenger; to eat rotten food; rotten food; and insulting epithet for a sorcerer who prays others to death.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai puʻupuʻu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lumpy poi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai pōʻala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to gulp, choke, suffocate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai pū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat together (both sexes), formerly tabu.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai waiū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nursing, suckling, as an infant; to nurse, suckle; a nursing child, unweaned animal. lit., to eat milk.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai ā manō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat like a shark. fig., to have a ravenous appetite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai ā puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat like a pig; to eat greedily; to wolf food.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai ʻokoʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cooked unpounded taro. lit., whole taro. Kauaʻi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai ʻuhaʻuha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat wastefully; a wasteful or riotous eater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai ʻāina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to rule or own land.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiakahonu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lit., food of the turtle.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiakanēnē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a native trailing, woody plant (Coprosma ernodeoides), with narrow, tiny leaves and black, berry-like fruits. lit., food of the nēnē goose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaialo</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>attendant of the chief's household, intimate of a chief. lit., eating [in the] presence.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>clothes iron; to iron, press, as clothes.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiau₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to look about with covetous or jealous eyes; to practice sorcery or poisoning.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiau₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>weary, discouraged by long continued work.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiea₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>all species of the endemic Hawaiian genus Nothocestrum, soft-wooded shrubs and trees with ovate or oblong leaves, yellowish flowers, and whitish to reddish berries. One slender species was used for thatching sticks (ʻaho) and fire-making.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiea₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exhaustion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaihue kanaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to kidnap; kidnapper.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaihumuhumu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to eat in order to destroy; to destroy wantonly or by violence or sorcery.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaihē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>center of a taro corm.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>hard and poor tasting, as thin or inferior fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaikapa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a privileged friend who shares the profits of a friend's land, sometimes sharing in the work; one who shares a friend's spouse; to share land or spouse; to pay part of a debt but withhold the remainder. lit., eat [on the] border.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaikena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sick and tired of a person or situation, surfeited, exhausted, discouraged, fatigued.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaikepakepa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to snap the jaws; to speak rapidly, as with overlapping words; to talk too much or too fast; to jabber.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaikola</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>interj. of scorn or derision, especially rejoicing over others' misfortunes, with meaning "serves you right" or "I told you so"; as a verb, to use this term.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>any oil, grease, lard; to oil, grease, lubricate. Many kinds of oil and grease are listed below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila hoʻomaloʻo pena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>turpentine. lit., oil for drying paint.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila hoʻonahā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>castor oil. lit., purge oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila koka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cod-liver oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila kolī</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>castor oil. lit., castor-bean oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila kēpama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sperm oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila māhu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kerosene. lit., steam oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila palai</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>frying oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila paʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>thick grease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaila puaʻa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>lard, pork grease.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻailahonua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>kerosene. lit., earth oil.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻailana₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>in love.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻailana₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>island.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻailea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>gasoline (contraction of ʻaila, oil, and ea, air).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻailolo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ceremony usually marking the end of training, so called because the student ate (ʻai) a portion of the head, and especially the brains (lolo), of a fish, dog, or hog offered to the gods; to partake of the ceremony.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻailolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>skilled, adept, expert, trained, proficient.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaimīkana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>linnet, California house finch, papaya bird (Carpodacus mexicanus frontalis), an early introduction to Hawaiʻi, now well established throughout the Hawaiian Islands. lit., papaya eater.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaina kea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a good-looking variety of sugar cane, of medium height, striped red and green or yellow, pith white and brown, leaves and leaf sheaths with white markings; used in medicine.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaina kea melemele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, the yellow mutant of ʻaina kea.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaina kō</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>cane trash, bagasse.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaina ʻole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>not eaten or consumed; without vegetable foods.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻainakini</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>navy blue cotton cloth.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaina₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>eaten, consumed devoured.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaina₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>rejected, as refuse, especially of sugar cane.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻainea</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>exhausted by strain and trouble, tired, weary.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻainemanema</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to criticize severely, hunt for flaws, split hairs.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻainiha</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bad temper; bad tempered, cross.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻainā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>sore aching; stiffness, as from overexercise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaipoʻolā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast to celebrate the completion of a hard task or project. lit., food [for] workers [in the] sun.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaipuni</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to encircle, go around, encompass, environ.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiwa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>nine (usually in counting in a series); nine times.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiā</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• ungodly, 
   • godless, 
   •  irreligious, unbelieving, careless of observance of taboos; 
   • wicked, wickedness.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiō₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wave that rises and falls without breaking; a swell.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiō₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>heigh-ho.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiʻaiele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>swinging, unsteady motion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiʻaiohua</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name given for persons sacrificed for not observing taboos during the offering of prayers by the priest (pronunciation not certain).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dependent, one living on the resources of another.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiʻami</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>type of hula with little foot movement, but with hip revolving throughout the dance; to dance thus.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiʻili loko</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have the use of fish ponds (loko); to control the interior (loko) land division known as ʻili.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaiʻē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>debt; to owe.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>score, points in a game, stake, wager.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dancing style or type.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>• stroke or hold in lua fighting; 
   • spear thrust.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻai₅</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>stone used in the kimo game other than the stone that is tossed and caught, which is the pōhaku kimo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaka</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to laugh; laughter.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaka hene</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to laugh at teasingly, jeer.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaka iki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to laugh a little, snicker.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakahakanaʻi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>name of a kind of white tapa.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakahi akahi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>inexperienced, trying out for the first time; novice, beginner.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakahi₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>one (especially in counting in a series).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakahi₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>for the first time, never before (usually followed by nō).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakahi₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to have just.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakakane</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Hawaiʻi ʻākepa (honey creeper), Loxops coccinea coccinea, endangered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaka₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a rent, split, chink, separation; to crack, split, scale
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaka₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakake</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>agate.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakakē</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>spry, quick, nimble, especially about getting into people's way or into trouble.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakalio</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>farthing.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakama</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>adamant.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai kulapepeiao</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>big, yellowish onion. lit., earring onion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai kīkānia</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a common variety of onion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai kūmakahiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a purplish annual onion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai lau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>green onion (Allium fistulosum); its leaves are eaten with salt salmon. lit., leaf onion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai mahina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wild onion, used for sore throat. lit., moon onion, so called because the curve of the section of the bulb suggests a crescent moon.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai naku</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>bulrush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai pilau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>garlic (Allium sativum).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai pūpū</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>garlic. lit., bunched onion.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the great bulrush (Scirpus validus, formerly called S. lacustris) that grows on the edge of fresh or brackish water marshes in Hawaiʻi. The plants have unbranched, slender, green stems, 1 to 3 m high, looking like giant onion plants. Formerly Hawaiians used them for house thatch or plaited them into mats for the lower layers of beds or for some temporary purposes, as the material is not durable. S. californicus on Niʻihau.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakaʻakai₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the common onion (Allium cepa); the tops look like those of the great bulrush.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakekeke₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>ruddy turnstone (Arenaria interpres), a winter migrant to Hawaiʻi, occurring in small flocks which rise and wheel together.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakekeke₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to talk loquaciously in a friendly, hospitable manner, bidding a guest to feel at home, make himself comfortable, eat plenty.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakekeʻe</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a honey creeper (Loxops coccinea caeruleirostris). Usually called ʻākepa in Eng.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakele</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acre.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakepeuʻie</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>Oʻahu ʻākepa (honey eater), Loxops coccinea rufa, presumed extinct; Maui ʻākepa, L. c. ochracea, endangered.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakeu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>active, lively, quick; pleasant, sociable.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻaki lou</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to take with a lou or fruit-plucking stick.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiahala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic, small, hairy, pink-flowered shrub (Hibiscus youngianus), usually found in marshy places.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakialoa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a group of Hawaiian honey creepers with long, curved bill, olive or yellow-green above, lighter below (Hemignathus obscurus), with subspecies on Hawaiʻi (H.o.o.), Lānaʻi  (H.o. lanaiesis), and Kauaʻi  (H. procerus). The latter is endangered; it has the longest curved beak, for sipping honey at the base of ʻieʻie and hala pepe leaves. cf. ʻiwi, ʻiʻiwi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakihi</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>birds. see below.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakihi keʻehi ʻale</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a small black sea bird, probably a stormy petrel (Oceanodroma), of which two dark, sooty species are known about the Hawaiian Islands, especially those to the northwest. lit., billow-treading ʻakihi.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakihi poʻo lāʻau</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the nuku puʻu honey creeper of Hawaiʻi  (Hemignathus wilsoni).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakihi pōlena</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a bird listed by Malo.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakihoʻolana</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>drydock, lit., floating canoe-rest.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>acid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakika kapolika</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>carbolic acid.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakikiki</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>the endemic Kauaʻi creeper (Loxops maculata bairdi, formerly Paroreomyza bairdi).
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiki₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>dwarfed; dwarf.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakilolo ʻulaʻula</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, with purplish leaves.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakilolo₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a wrasse fish of the hīnālea type (Gomphosus varius). Also  hīnālea ʻakilolo. This fish was used by priests as the pani or closing medicine for head diseases. The taro or sugar cane of the same name might substitute. lit., brain biting.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakilolo₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of sugar cane, striped with green and deep purplish-red when young, with yellow and red when older; named for the fish.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakilolo₃</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>a variety of taro.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakima</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>feast of unleavened bread.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakimalala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>admiral.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakina</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>biting; bite.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiohala</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>an endemic, small, hairy, pink-flowered shrub (Hibiscus youngianus), usually found in marshy places.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakioma</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>axiom.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakipohe₁</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to nip.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakipohe₂</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>round, as a leaf; compact, concise.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakipohe₄</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to center or concentrate in one place, as wind, rain.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakipīhopa</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>archbishop.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiu</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>to search, seek, probe, penetrate, spy.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
<idx:entry scriptable="yes" spell="yes">
<idx:orth>
<b>ʻakiʻaki haole</b><br>
</idx:orth>
<br/>buffalo grass (Stenotaphrum secundatum), an American grass used for lawns. Some people believed that buffalo grass could be used to exorcise spirits because it had been given the same name (ʻakiʻaki) as the seashore rush grass, which was used for this purpose.
</idx:entry>
<hr/>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>